Adult education lecturers teach academic and vocational subjects to adults of all ages and academic abilities.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

developing programmes of learning activities
planning, preparing and researching lessons
preparing teaching materials
contact/teaching time with students on an individual or group basis
checking and assessing students' work and giving feedback
encouraging personal development via tutorial/pastoral work
invigilating examinations
attending staff meetings
liaising with other professionals/employers
The job commonly requires working evenings and weekends. Many people enter the profession through part-time and temporary contracts, supplementing their salary by writing, private tuition and exam marking or by taking up several part-time posts.

Typical employers of adult education lecturers
State-maintained and private sixth-form, adult and further education colleges
Community or local authority adult education centres
The armed forces
The prison service
Vacancies are advertised in local authority jobs lists, Teaching Appointments, the Times Educational Supplement, Times Higher Education and national, regional and local newspapers. A few specialist recruitment agencies also handle vacancies.

Qualifications and training required
There are no set academic requirements for entry into the profession. However, a degree related to your respective subject is usually necessary. Requirements can vary slightly between employers and so are usually specified individually.

Although it is possible to become a lecturer without a teaching qualification, your chances of securing a role and progressing in your career improve if you do have one. There are various levels of qualifications that you can study in further education colleges, or you can do a PGCE for post-compulsory education at a higher education institution. Employers may also favour candidates who have several years' work experience. Some employers provide the opportunity to gain a teaching qualification via part-time study once in a post.

Key skills for adult education lecturers
Ability to work well with students of all ages and backgrounds
Organisational skills
The ability to work as a team with colleagues
Extensive knowledge of the subject area
Effective verbal communication skills
Written skills to produce coursework materials
Creative skills to plan and deliver interesting lessons and lectures at the right level for students