Typical responsibilities involve:

developing ideas and pinpointing business problems
analysing and interpreting a variety of information
commissioning external qualitative and quantitative research
keeping up-to-date with cultural/social trends and customers’ views and attitudes
undertaking qualitative research activities
making presentations to clients and agency staff
evaluating campaign effectiveness
analysing sales data
Advertising account managers need enthusiasm, stamina, determination and perseverance to succeed – particularly because graduate training places attract a lot of competition. Once you get there though, the rewards are great. You could be earning anything from around £18,000 up to £120,000 a year.

Typical employers of advertising account planners
Advertising account planners are employed by large national and international advertising companies, direct marketing companies and independent creative and media agencies. Jobs will typically be with advertising agencies, or in media advertising departments. Most jobs are located in London and major UK and international cities. Vacancies are advertised online, by recruitment agencies, in national newspapers and in publications such as Campaign, The Drum, Marketing, Media Week, and Marketing Week.
ADVERTISE HERE


Qualifications and training required
There are routes into advertising account planning for both university graduates and school leavers.

A degree in any subject is acceptable for entry into the profession, although journalism, psychology, business studies, communications, media studies, marketing or management graduates may be preferred.

Relevant paid or voluntary work experience in market research, marketing or advertising  is advantageous. Some agencies offer vacation placements, which can provide an invaluable insight into the profession and the opportunity to make useful contacts.

For information on how to get into a career in this area via a school leaver route, visit the business section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers.

Key skills for advertising account planners
Possessing confidence and good interpersonal skills
Teamworking abilities
Presentation and verbal communication skills
Commercial awareness
Creativity
The ability to cope with pressure
Effective analytical and organisational abilities