Analytical chemists assess the chemical structure and nature of substances. Their skills are needed for a variety of purposes including drug development, forensic analysis and toxicology.

Analytical chemists analyse samples using a range of techniques such as electro-chromatography, high performance liquid chromatography and spectroscopy. They are employed by a variety of public and private sector organisations, and can specialise in areas such as toxicology, pharmaceuticals, quality control or forensics. Typical responsibilities include:

using a range of software, techniques and equipment to carry out research and analysis
analysing and interpreting data
making sure that data is accurately recorded in accordance with guidelines
reporting and presenting results
writing research papers, reports, reviews and summaries
keeping up to date with scientific and technical developments
ensuring that health and safety standards are adhered to
preparing product licence documentation
liaising with customers, suppliers and research/scientific staff
developing new analytical methods
Typical employers of analytical chemists
Government agencies
Publicly funded research councils
Hospitals
Universities
Public health laboratories
Environmental agencies
Specialist research organisations
Consultancies
Testing companies
Private food, materials, polymers, biotechnology, pharmaceutical and chemical companies
Opportunities are available in large, localised centres throughout the UK, although roles in research and development (R&D) are more common in the south of England.

Vacancies generally attract strong competition, especially those for graduate training schemes with major companies. For this reason, applications (particularly those to larger employers) should be made early in the academic year. Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services, in national newspapers, in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist, Nature, Chemistry World and their online equivalents, and in other journals published by scientific professional institutions. Specialist recruitment agencies also advertise vacancies, although these are generally for laboratory-based posts.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
You can only become an analytical chemist if you have a good honours degree (typically a 2.1 or above) in a relevant subject such as chemistry, applied/analytical chemistry or biochemistry. There are also opportunities for geochemists, materials scientists, mathematicians and environmental scientists within the field of analytical chemistry. Practical research/laboratory work experience is helpful, although full training on the job is often available.

A postgraduate qualification in analytical chemistry may be beneficial for careers in research or for career advancement in the long term and may allow entry to the profession at a more senior level. 

Membership of the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) may help you progress to more advanced positions. This is a recognition of achievement gained through professional activity, and may be awarded three years after graduation. Members may subsequently be awarded the status of fellow (FRSC) or chartered chemist (CChem), denoting professionalism, achievement and a high level of specialised subject knowledge.

Key skills for analytical chemists
Analytical work demands patience, determination, creativity, flexibility and decisiveness. Employers increasingly look for both research and transferable skills including:

a logical and independent mind
the motivation and ability to solve complex problems
a systematic approach to tasks
theoretical knowledge of analytical techniques
the ability to develop and validate new methods
excellent IT skills
numerical and analytical ability
teamworking
responsibility
communication and presentation skills