Architects design new buildings and suggest alterations to existing buildings.

Architects create designs for new construction projects, alterations and redevelopments. They use their specialist construction knowledge and high-level drawing skills to design buildings that are functional, safe, sustainable and aesthetically pleasing.

Architects stay involved throughout the construction process, adapting their plans according to budget constraints, environmental factors or client needs. As such, they operate as part of an overall project design team, working closely with a range of construction professionals from quantity surveyors to building services engineers.

Typical work activities include:

creating building designs and highly detailed drawings both by hand and by using specialist computer-aided design (CAD) applications
liaising with construction professionals about the feasibility of potential projects
working around constraining factors such as town planning legislation, environmental impact and project budget
working closely with a team of other professionals such as building service engineers, construction managers, quantity surveyors and architectural technologists
applying for planning permission and advice from governmental new build and legal departments
writing and presenting reports, proposals, applications and contracts
specifying the requirements for the project
adapting plans according to circumstances and resolving any problems that may arise during construction
playing a part in project and team management
travelling regularly to building sites, proposed locations and client meetings
For the most part an architect’s working day will be office based. However, site visits and meetings with clients are frequent, so travel can figure prominently.

Working hours are typically standard office hours (eg 9.00 am to 5.00 pm, Monday to Friday), but architects may work longer hours, evenings and weekends if there are tight project deadlines to meet.

Most architects work for private practices, but chartered architects often set up their own practice.

For information on salaries see our construction salary guide.

Continuing to learn and develop your expertise as a professional is a key part of the job, with an architect expected to carry out 35 hours of ‘continuous professional development’ activities per year. Career progression is possible through partnership or specialisation.

Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies and in local and national newspapers. Relevant publications such as the RIBA Journal, Architects Journal and their online equivalents also carry advertisements.

Find out more about architecture careers in our 'architecture: area of work' feature.

Typical employers of architects
Private architect practices
Large construction companies, particularly consultancies
Public sector bodies
Large industry organisations with substantial property portfolios (such as large retailers)
Qualifications and training required
You can only become an architect if you have a relevant degree, as ‘architect’ is a protected title that only qualified professionals registered with the Architect’s Registration Board (ARB) may use. Qualification requires at least seven years of combined study and practical experience. This is currently accomplished in three parts as dictated by the Royal Institute of British Architecture (RIBA), but the qualification process is under review and might change from September 2018.

The current process involves the following…
Part one is a RIBA-accredited undergraduate architecture course of three or four years (usually a BA or BSc), followed by a year gaining professional experience (work experience). This is usually in a practice but could also be in any relevant sector of the building industry, as long as it is supervised. Part two involves another two years of full-time study; this could be a further bachelors of architecture, a masters or a diploma. This is then followed by a further year of supervised professional experience. Part three involves an examination that draws on the experience gained from parts one and two.


On passing the exam, an architect can register with the ARB and will be a chartered member of RIBA, which can greatly aid career progression. Those studying in Scotland can register for joint membership with both the RIBA and its Scottish equivalent, the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland (RIAS).

There are no conversion courses in architecture for graduates of other undergraduate degrees who want to become an architect; all prospective students must start with an accredited undergraduate degree (RIBA part one).

Applying for architecture degree courses
If you are considering applying for a RIBA part one degree course, most institutions request a combination of arts and science subjects amd some may require specific subjects, such as maths and art and design. In Scotland, the usual requirements are four or five highers (ABBB–AAAA) and you will need English at least to national 5 level, although higher English is necessary.

A portfolio is usually required as evidence that you have the potential to learn the technical drawing you need for architecture. An interview is also likely to be part of the selection process.

Key skills for architects
Excellent communication skills, both written and oral
High levels of creativity and imagination
A keen interest in the built environment and the dedication to see projects through to their conclusion
Willingness to work long hours, under time and budget pressure
Excellent design and drafting skills and proficiency with computer-aided design (CAD)
A keen eye for detail, as well as the ability to see the bigger picture of a project
Organisational, project management and planning skills, including the ability to juggle multiple tasks
An analytical mind with excellent problem-solving and mathematical ability
Leadership skills as well as the ability to work well within a team of other professionals
An awareness of the specific environmental and social impact of your projects