Aromatherapists treat a variety of physical conditions, illnesses and psychological disorders with essential aromatic oils that are extracted or distilled from flowers, trees, spices, fruits or herbs.

Aromatherapy is a treatment that uses essential oils to promote physical and emotional wellbeing. The typical responsibilities of an aromatherapist include:

undertaking patient consultations
identifying appropriate essential oils
planning and explaining treatment requirements
creating blends of oils
applying oils (often via therapeutic massage) and undertaking treatment
liaising with GPs and making referrals to specialists and other healthcare practitioners
providing advice about diet, exercise and lifestyle
keeping accurate confidential patient records
keeping up to date with research and new developments in the profession
managing stock levels
marketing and promoting their practice
Typical employers of aromatherapists
Most aromatherapists are self-employed, working full or part-time from home, from clients' homes or from their own practice. Many work as part of a team of alternative health practitioners for private practices such as specialist and complementary health care clinics and health farms. Some aromatherapists provide additional therapies including massage and reflexology. A very limited amount of contract work may be available with some GP practices and NHS trusts (in hospitals, hospices and community health centres).

Qualifications and training required
There are courses available for those wishing to train in aromatherapy at a range of levels, suitable for either school leavers or graduates. Courses that meet the national occupational standards for aromatherapy typically take around nine months, and you usually need to be at least 18 to be eligible. There are also foundation degrees and degrees that cover aromatherapy, sometimes alongside other complementary medicines, and there are some courses at level 2 and 3 suitable for those aged 16 and 17, which may also cover beauty therapy.

Regulation of the aromatherapy profession is voluntary. However, it is highly advisable to register with an officially recognised professional organisation that covers aromatherapy, such as the Complementary and Natural Healthcare Council (CNHC) or Federation of Holistic Therapists. Before you can register with these organisations you will need an approved qualification. Details of approved qualifications can be found on the organisations' websites.

Experience of working in a medical, massage or beauty clinic will also be helpful. It is necessary to have a good understanding of anatomy and physiology in addition to detailed knowledge of essential oils and their preparation.

Key skills for aromatherapists
Excellent organisational, interpersonal, listening and communication skills are essential. Aromatherapists also need to possess a mature, confident, sensitive and empathetic temperament.