Public house managers are responsible for overseeing the running and profitability of pubs and for managing their employees.

Specific duties and the amount of customer and staff contact vary according to the size and type of pub: managers of larger establishments may not be greatly involved in the front-of-house work, whereas managers of smaller public houses often have frequent contact with both customers and employees.

Typical responsibilities include:

recruiting, training and supervising staff
managing budgets
maintaining statistical and financial records
planning and problem solving
promoting and marketing the business
ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation and licensing laws
serving customers
placing orders
stock-taking and re-stocking
handling administration and paperwork
organising and promoting social events such as quizzes, karaoke evenings, live music and live comedy
liaising with customers, employees, suppliers, licensing authorities, sales representatives and the police
marketing products
making improvements to the running of the business
setting targets and maximising profitability.
Typical employers of pub managers
Independent pub companies
Small local breweries
Regional brewers
National and multinational breweries
Some landlords may also be successful enough to set up shop as a free house (a pub that is owned independently of the breweries that supply it), though this requires particularly careful management.

Vacancies are advertised via the internet, by recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in publications such as The Caterer and The Morning Advertiser.

Several of the larger breweries operate accelerated graduate management schemes that combine vocational managerial experience and the opportunity to gain relevant examinations. Networking and speculative approaches to employers are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes to becoming a public house manager for both university graduates and school leavers.

A degree or HND in a subject such as business, marketing, management, hospitality management, or hotel and catering may be beneficial. A small number of universities offer specialist licensed retail management qualifications.

Retail, customer service, supervisory and bar work experience is advantageous.

Key skills for pub managers
confidence
reliability
resilience
excellent interpersonal skills
communication skills
leadership skills
organisational skills
IT skills.