Bilingual or multilingual secretaries are employed to use their foreign language skills for a variety of administrative and secretarial purposes.

Bilingual or multilingual secretaries and personal assistants (PAs) carry out administrative work and, as the job title suggests, they can do this in more than one language.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

answering telephone calls/taking messages in a foreign language
organising meetings and managing diaries
booking transport and accommodation for overseas visits/international visitors (managing travel itineraries)
translating documents from English to foreign languages
acting as an interpreter
handling foreign correspondence
meeting and greeting clients
typing and compiling reports
reviewing and recording expenses
filing
managing databases
recruiting, training and supervising junior staff
The role can also include some duties specific to the sector your employer works in: for example, if you work for a manufacturing company, your role might include some quality assurance or auditing work. It’s for this reason that many bilingual or multilingual secretaries end up specialising in a particular sector or industry.

Job titles vary according to the sector and the company: employers may advertise for bilingual/multilingual secretaries, PAs, executive assistants, administrators or team administrators. However, job advertisements can also specify the particular foreign language or languages required, for example: ‘French-speaking executive assistant'.

The work offers the possibility of promotion via climbing into more senior positions or by moving into related employment areas such as translating, interpreting, marketing or public relations.

Typical employers of bilingual secretaries
National governments
Private companies or manufacturers that have a great deal of international work
Commercial or financial organisations
Management consultancies and professional services firms
Banks
Law firms
Jobs are typically advertised via jobs boards, specialist recruitment agencies and organisations such as the Chartered Institute of Linguists.

Qualifications and training required
Fluency in the appropriate foreign language(s) is essential, but formal academic qualifications tend not to be, although sometimes employers will ask for minimum qualifications equivalent to A levels/highers.

Employers may still ask for a minimum number of words typed per minute and, although shorthand is no longer asked for, it can be advantageous. It is possible to complete a secretarial training courses at further education colleges.

Many employers prefer candidates to possess some experience in the sector the employer works in or, at the very least, in previous office or customer service-focused roles. Relevant experience can be gained initially via temporary agency work, which can in turn lead to permanent work.

Key skills for bilingual secretaries
Fluency in the languages required
IT skills (often advanced MS Office skills and the ability to learn bespoke databases and other software)
Organisation, time management and the ability to multitask
Attention to detail
Communication skills
Teamworking
Initiative
Discretion: you could learn about confidential information
A flexible approach to work and the ability to cope with a changing, demanding workload
Organisational skills
