Biomedical engineers are specialists who help to develop advanced healthcare technology.

Biomedical engineers work with a wide range of medical, technical and administrative staff and, at times, patients. Responsibilities of the job include:

designing, testing and implementing new medical procedures, such as computer-aided surgery and tissue engineering
designing, developing, testing and modifying products, equipment and devices
liaising with medical, engineering and scientific staff
training staff to use equipment safely
maintaining equipment
writing reports and documentation
undertaking relevant research
You can find out more about engineering jobs in research and development by reading our research and development industry sector overview, written by an industry expert.
Typical employers of biomedical engineers
Hospitals
Universities
Research organisations
Diagnostic/medical instrumentation manufacturers
Charities, such as Designability: The Bath Institute of Medical Engineering
For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
To become a biomedical engineer, a good degree in a relevant subject such as biomedical engineering, biomedical science, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering or physics is required. Postgraduate qualifications can be beneficial (particularly for non-engineering graduates), and may be necessary for some posts. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate options to explore your options.

Prior relevant experience can be helpful; some employers offer final-year project work, degree sponsorship, internships and industrial placements, which can provide a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Research work, voluntary work (for charities such as Remap, hospital placements and laboratory experience can also be useful.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine (IPEM). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

To work within the NHS, you will need to complete the scientist training programme (STP) after your degree. The application process for the STP typically starts in January. Scotland has separate training schemes, which also involve a three year STP or an equivalent programme.

After completing the STP, you can then apply for a certificate of attainment from the Academy of Healthcare Science. This is will enable you to apply for registration with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

In order to practice as a clinical scientist in the UK, you must be registered with the HCPC. You will automatically be eligible to apply for registration if you have completed a HCPC approved course, but you will need to pay a fee for the HCPC to process your application, plus a registration fee, which is reduced by 50% if you graduated from an approved course within the last two years.

Key skills for biomedical engineers
Careful measurement and analytical skills
Good attention to detail
A good eye for design
The creative and technical ability to turn designs into products
The ability to empathise with patients
Communication and teamworking skills