Broadcasting presenters provide a public voice or face to a range of shows broadcast on TV, radio and the internet.

Broadcast presenters work for the BBC, national independent radio and television companies and local/regional radio stations. Opportunities may also arise with independent television and radio production companies. Key responsibilities include:

writing and rehearsing scripts
meeting with programme directors/producers to discuss programmes/shows
choosing and playing music
organising meetings, interviews and schedules
undertaking relevant background research
interviewing guests via the telephone or in person
presenting traffic, weather and/or news summaries
giving reviews of newly released books, films, music etc
providing programme links
operating technical equipment, such as radio ‘desks’.
Most jobs occur in major cities such as London, Manchester, Birmingham and Leeds. Vacancies attract intense competition, with many receiving little or no advertising. Consequently candidates need stamina, enthusiasm, determination and perseverance to succeed. Opportunities are advertised via the internet, in newspapers, and specialist publications such as The Stage, Radio and Broadcast. Networking, job shadowing, speculative applications and sector research are essential (directories including The Guardian’s Media Guide can provide useful contact information).

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into broadcasting for both university graduates and school leavers.

Applicants with qualifications in journalism, communication/media studies, music technology, performing arts, English and media performance may be preferred. Specific degree subjects may be required for specialist programmes.

A genuine interest in, knowledge of and/or experience of television/radio is essential.

It is important to gain as much paid (or unpaid) work experience as possible – this may be as a broadcast assistant, actor, producer, or news-gatherer, or via self-employment as a club/private disc jockey (DJ). Voluntary work for student newspapers/radio stations and local/hospital radio and television stations can also be helpful.

Key skills for broadcast presenters
Employers seek confident and creative candidates who are adaptable, calm and able to work well under pressure. Good organisational, communication, team-working and problem-solving skills are also necessary.