Careers consultants provide advice about training, employment options and career progression to professionals and career changers.

Careers consultants provide guidance to people making choices about their career. They could help a client who wants to further their career, a client who wants to change career direction, or a client who isn’t quite sure what they want.

Careers consultants undertake a wide range of duties including:

assessing clients' personal characteristics, skills and interests via one-to-one interviews and/or group sessions
providing appropriate help, advice and recommendations based on interviews/test results
running workshops
offering practical assistance with job seeking, applications/CVs and interviews
administering and interpreting psychometric and personality tests
helping clients to solve problems and manage their own careers
aiding clients in their search for appropriate employment
writing action plans, reports and careers literature
counselling clients that are suffering from stress or facing redundancy/redeployment
undertaking general administration
marketing and promoting services.
Typical employers of careers consultants
Employers of careers consultants include: management consultants, HR departments and private career/occupational psychologist consultancies. Many careers consultants are self-employed, but this is normally only a viable option for individuals with several years' relevant experience.

Opportunities are advertised via the internet, in local, regional and national newspapers and in publications including Portico (a fortnightly recruitment magazine by the Institute of Careers Guidance).

Qualifications and training required
Although any degree discipline is acceptable for entry into the profession, many careers consultants possess degrees in subjects such as human resources and psychology. Professional qualifications in career guidance, counselling or personnel management are also useful. A list of relevant courses is available on the Career Development Institute’s website.

Several years of relevant work experience is normally necessary prior to entry. This can be gained in public sector/higher education careers advising, personnel management, counselling or occupational psychology.

Membership with the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) offers opportunities for continuing professional development (CPD) and can help show your commitment to your field. You can become a member by obtaining a CIPD qualification or through experience assessment, where you use your experience from the past three years to gain professional recognition.

Key skills for careers consultants
Careers consultants should have:

plenty of confidence
excellent listening, verbal and written communication skills
confidentiality
a non-prejudicial manner
good interpersonal skills.