Catering managers are responsible for planning, administering and supervising an organisation's catering operations and services.

Catering managers lead teams of chefs and catering assistants. They are responsible for running the day-to-day catering operations and services in restaurants, hotels and resorts. Catering managers are responsible for monitoring the quality of the food and service and for making sure that their outlets perform well. The most important part of the job is achieving good quality within a budget and maintaining high standards of hygiene and customer satisfaction. Typical activities include:

planning menus in consultation with chefs
ordering supplies
hiring, training, supervising and motivating permanent and temporary staff
organising staff rotas
ensuring that health and safety regulations are strictly observed, recorded and archived
monitoring the quality of the product and service provided
keeping to budgets and maintaining financial and administrative records.
Travel is not normally part of the working day of a catering manager, apart from those working in location catering such as the media industry or event catering (eg conferences, weddings and sports events). There are opportunities to work abroad, including on cruise liners.

Shift work and unsocial long hours are most common in hotels, restaurants and resorts. Catering service operations within business, industry and institutions are more likely to work normal office hours.

Promotion prospects are generally good for those with strong interpersonal skills and a high level of motivation, although much will depend on the individual and the organisation. There are opportunities for self-employment: catering managers can work toward managing their own restaurant.

Typical employers of catering managers
Hotels
Catering firms
In-house catering operations including those in large corporate settings such as business and factory canteens
Hospitals
Nursing homes
Prisons
Colleges and schools
Tourist attractions
Offshore oil/gas rigs etc
Transport providers including airlines and cruise liners
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into catering management for both university graduates and school leavers.

While open to graduates from all disciplines, employers value relevant qualifications such as:

catering/culinary management
hospitality management
food science and technology
hotel and restaurant management
hospitality, leisure and tourism
international hospitality management
business/management studies
home economics/nutrition.
Training covers both the practical and business aspects of the job. Previous relevant work experience is often a requirement. Aspiring catering managers should look for part-time or seasonal work in catering outlets such as pubs, restaurants and fast-food outlets at weekends and during holidays. A smart personal appearance is essential.

Key skills for catering managers
Excellent communication and interpersonal skills
Strong organisational and time management skills
Decision making skills
Ability to manage in a diverse environment with a focus on client and customer services
Good business and commercial acumen
Strong leadership and motivating skills including the ability to build strong relationships with customers and staff
The ability to think quickly, work in stressful circumstances and stay calm in a crisis
Financial, budgeting and stock-taking skills
Knowledge of food, food hygiene (including hazard analysis and critical control points) and food preparation