Charities fundraisers are responsible for raising money by encouraging donations from individuals and businesses.

Fundraising posts within charities and other organisations are usually paid rather than voluntary and may offer a range of benefits such as performance-based pay and a car allowance. Typical responsibilities include:

organising and helping with traditional fundraising activities such as sponsored or promotional events, raffles, house-to-house and street collections
recruiting and coordinating the work of volunteers
approaching individuals, schools, universities, local authorities, shops and commercial organisations for sponsorship and donations
developing new fundraising ideas and events
Fundraising for a charity can be an immensely satisfying job. It is particularly well-suited to those who are looking for flexible or family-friendly work.

Typical employers for charity fundraisers
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, in newspapers, in Community Care and in specialist charity sector publications such as Charity Times and Third Sector. It is advisable to make speculative applications and you may find useful information in the Voluntary Agencies Directory and Charities Digest. Local charities and volunteer bureaux can often provide work experience placements.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into becoming a charities fundraiser for both graduates and school leavers.

For graduates, any degree is acceptable for entry into the profession. However, qualifications in the following subjects may be particularly helpful:

finance
business studies
management
marketing
public relations
For school leavers, a HND qualification may be beneficial, but employers generally value relevant skills and work experience more highly than academic qualifications.

Key skills for charities fundraisers
Sales and negotiation abilities
Communication skills
IT skills
Good organisation
Administrative skills
Resourcefulness
Creative thinking
Effective problem solving