Administrators are employed by charities, voluntary and non-profit making organisations to undertake a variety of administrative, secretarial, financial and human resources tasks.

Administrators can often be key employees within charitable and non-profit making organisations; they are responsible for linking the organisation with the public and the media. Specific responsibilities and the amount of contact with volunteers and the general public will vary according to the size of the charity: in larger organisations administrators may be mostly office-based, whereas those working for smaller employers often have frequent contact with voluntary staff and the public. Common duties include:

recruiting, training and managing employees and volunteers
financial/accounts administration
handling correspondence
producing agendas and minutes
organising meetings
answering telephone calls
contacting potential donors
filing
liaising with relevant organisations
undertaking mail-shots and similar publicity tasks
implementing new IT/administrative systems
Typical employers of charities administrators
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, in newspapers and specialist charity sector publications such as Charity Times and Third Sector. Opportunities are also advertised by a number of specialist recruitment agencies including Charity People and Charity Job. Many jobs are only advertised internally, so speculative applications are advisable, for which the Voluntary Agencies Directory and Charities Digest may be useful. Local charities and volunteer bureaux can often provide work experience placements.

Qualifications and training required
You can become a charities administrator both with or without a degree.

Graduates don’t need to have a specific degree discipline, although a business studies, management or social administration qualification may be helpful. A foundation degree or HND may prove beneficial for school leavers. However, strong competition for a relatively small number of permanent opportunities means that voluntary and administrative work experience are often valued more highly than academic qualifications.

Key skills for charity administrators
Administrative skills
Flexibility
Willingness to do routine tasks
Interpersonal skills
IT skills
Secretarial skills