Child psychotherapists use language and play to observe, assess, help and treat children and young people who are experiencing behavioural, emotional, social and psychological difficulties.

Child psychotherapists work with children who are suffering from symptoms including depression, aggression, phobias, anxiety, physical/psychosomatic disorders, learning difficulties and behavioural problems. They perform controlled sessions (oneto five times per week) with individuals, groups and/or families where verbal interaction, toys, puppets, dolls, art materials etc. are used to explore the child’s behaviour, attitudes and emotions. Their aim is to help children understand and address their inner conflicts. Typical duties include:

liaising with professionals such as teachers, psychiatrists, psychologists, paediatric nurses, social workers, family therapists and health visitors
supervising trainees
keeping up-to-date with developments within the profession by attending appropriate courses, conferences and meetings
Typical employers of child psychotherapists
National Health Service (NHS)
Hospitals
Mental health services
Primary and secondary schools
Social services
Opportunities are advertised via the internet, in national newspapers and a variety of publications including Opportunities, the Association of Child Psychotherapists Bulletin and NHS trusts lists of vacancies.

Qualifications and training required
All candidates wishing to work as child psychotherapists must gain a qualification approved by the Association of Child Psychotherapists. Relevant degree subjects include psychology, sociology, medicine, nursing, social work and teaching.

Qualification is a lengthy, expensive process – there are few grants available and training takes four to six years on a part time basis. In addition to a relevant qualification, it is essential to have substantial paid or voluntary experience of working with both normal and disturbed children of all ages and their families. Consequently, child psychotherapy is not normally a first career choice. Many people enter the profession later in life, having already been employed in a similar field.

Key skills for child psychotherapists
Listening skills
Observation
Sensitivity and empathy
Sincerity
Discretion
Ability to build rapport
Positive outlook
Excellent communication skills