Clinical cytogeneticists work as part of a medical team responsible for detecting, analysing and interpreting genetic diseases in human blood, tissue and bodily fluid samples.

Clinical cytogeneticists analyse abnormalities in patients’ chromosomes via microscopy, photography, DNA techniques, computer-aided technology and other automated testing procedures. Typical responsibilities include:

testing unborn babies for genetic traits
helping haematologists analyse blood samples
laboratory management
liaising with relevant medical/laboratory staff
recording data
writing reports and journal articles
problem solving
research and development
Typical employers of clinical cytogeneticists
NHS hospitals and research centres
Private research facilities
Jobs are sometimes advertised in national newspapers, local hospital or health authority job lists and scientific journals such as New Scientist and Nature. Speculative applications may be worthwhile – the Association for Clinical Genetic Science can help with contact information.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
In order to begin training with the NHS scientist training programme (STP) you will need a 2.1 degree or higher in a relevant BSc discipline. Further research experience or qualifications are also desirable. The application process for the STP typically starts in January.

After completing the STP, you can then apply for a certificate of attainment from the Academy of Healthcare Science. This is will enable you to apply for registration with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

In order to practise as a clinical scientist in the UK, you must be registered with the HCPC. You will automatically be eligible to apply for registration if you have completed a HCPC approved course, but you will need to pay a fee for the HCPC to process your application, plus a registration fee, which is reduced by 50% if you graduated from an approved course within the last two years.

Research work, hospital laboratory placements and/or relevant experience gained using similar scientific and analytical techniques can be useful.

Key skills for clinical cytogeneticists
A logical and inquisitive mind
Research skills
Painstakingly accurate
Communication
Teamwork skills