Clinical molecular geneticists are responsible for detecting, analysing and interpreting disease-linked genetic abnormalities within patients via molecular biological and biochemical screening.

Clinical molecular geneticists analyse patients’ DNA specimens via a variety of techniques such as fragment analysis, DNA sequencing and mutation detection. Most of their work is laboratory-based. Other responsibilities include:

using a variety of tests and diagnostic procedures to determine genotypes (the genetic make-up of individuals) and/or identify genetic diseases
supervising and training junior laboratory staff and medical technical officers
recording and analysing quality control data
keeping up to date with developments in the profession
attending conferences and relevant training sessions
liaising with colleagues and other healthcare professionals
carrying out research and development
analysing and interpreting DNA test results
writing reports that outline test results for use by GPs, paediatricians and consultants
Typical employers of clinical molecular geneticists
The NHS
Universities
Government agencies
Pharmaceutical, biotechnology, food, energy, water, horticultural and environmental companies
There is intense competition for the limited number of training vacancies that arise each year. Job vacancies are advertised online, in national newspapers, local hospital or health authority job boards and scientific journals such as New Scientist, Nature Genetics and Nature.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
You will need a 2.1 in a medical or life science degree such as biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, biotechnology, physiology, medicine or biomedical science. It is essential to have studied genetics on your degree and a relevant postgraduate qualification can be beneficial. Read our article on scientific postgraduate study to explore your different options and visit the science section of TARGETpostgrad for lots more advice.

Research work, hospital laboratory placements and experience gained using relevant scientific and analytical techniques can be particularly helpful.

To work within the NHS, you will need to complete the scientist training programme (STP) after your degree. The application process for the STP typically starts in January.

Scotland has separate training schemes, which also involve a three year STP or an equivalent programme.

After completing the STP, you can then apply for a certificate of attainment from the Academy of Healthcare Science. This is will enable you to apply for registration with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

In order to practice as a clinical scientist in the UK, you must be registered with the HCPC. You will automatically be eligible to apply for registration if you have completed a HCPC approved course, but you will need to pay a fee for the HCPC to process your application, plus a registration fee, which is reduced by 50% if you graduated from an approved course within the last two years.

Key skills for clinical molecular geneticists
Problem solving
Communication skills
An analytical and inquisitive mind
Teamworking skills
Research skills
Good IT skills