Tissue typing clinical scientists are responsible for genetically matching patients with possible organ and stem cell (including bone marrow) donors.

Clinical tissue typers analyse specimens of blood, tissues and so on via computer-aided and detailed scientific testing procedures. Most of their work is laboratory based. Key tasks include:

using molecular techniques to routinely tissue type patients and donors
assigning donors and patients according to tissue type
undertaking donor/patient screening to identify particular antibodies
isolating, measuring and cataloguing DNA samples
isolating and preserving lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell important to the immune system)
undertaking bone marrow transplant cellular assessments
offering advice to clinicians about best donor/patient matches
Other responsibilities include:

laboratory management
writing reports
maintaining computerised records
participating in research and development activities
Typical employers of tissue typing clinical scientists
NHS Blood and Transplant
Immunology department of NHS hospitals
The Anthony Nolan Trust
Teaching hospitals and universities
See the British Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics website for information about job vacancies and training courses. Vacancies are also advertised on the NHS website and in specialist periodicals such as New Scientist.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
A degree in a relevant subject such as biochemistry, chemistry, immunology or genetics is required for entry. A postgraduate qualification, research work, hospital laboratory placements and/or experience gained using similar scientific and analytical techniques can be beneficial.

To work within the NHS, you will need to complete the scientist training programme (STP) after your degree. The application process for the STP typically starts in January.

Scotland has separate training schemes, which also involve a three year STP or an equivalent programme.

After completing the STP, you can then apply for a certificate of attainment from the Academy for Healthcare Science (ACHS). This will enable you to apply for registration with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

In order to practice as a clinical scientist in the UK, you must be registered with the HCPC. You will automatically be eligible to apply for registration if you have completed a HCPC approved course, but you will need to pay a fee for the HCPC to process your application, plus a registration fee, which is reduced by 50% if you graduated from an approved course within the last two years.

If you do not have a degree, you can apply to the NHS practitioner training programme (PTP). This is an undergraduate training programme, during which you will complete an accredited BSc in healthcare science. Life science graduates (blood science, infection science, cellular science and genetics science) can apply for registration with the HCPC. Physiological and physical science graduates can apply for Professional Standards Authority (PSA) Accredited Voluntary Registration via the ACHS.

Key skills for tissue typing clinical scientists
Ability to work quickly and accurately
A logical and inquisitive mind
Good experimental and research skills
Communication skills
Teamwork skills