Clothing and textile technologists design, develop and manufacture natural and synthetic yarns, fabrics and textiles.

Textile technologists work with a variety of materials including man-made and natural textiles, leather, fur, plastics and metals. They may be responsible for developing fabrics for furnishings, clothing, household items, medical supplies, or textiles for use within the automotive industry. Responsibilities include:

liaising with and providing technical advice to design, marketing, purchasing and production staff
creating products in response to given briefs
amending designs where necessary
producing samples
dyeing and printing textiles
evaluating, identifying and selecting fabrics/products from suppliers
ensuring that products meet set requirements and specifications (eg colour fastness, durability etc)
checking products for suitability and testing for performance under various conditions
controlling production and quality standards
problem solving
dealing with customer queries and complaints
keeping up to date with trends and innovations
You can find out more about what life might be like by reading our overview of product technology and food technology.

Typical employers
Employers of clothing and textile technologists include manufacturers of industrial textiles, small textile companies, retailers, research and development organisations and clothing manufacturers.

Jobs are advertised by careers services and recruitment agencies, in national newspapers, and in trade publications including Drapers, Knitting Trade Journal, International Dyer and Apparel.

Networking, job shadowing and speculative applications may be helpful. Directories such as Textile Source and The Fashion Index can provide useful contact information.

Strengthen your job applications by reading our tips on how to write a great graduate retail CV.
Find out what salary you might earn as a graduate in retail.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a relevant degree such as clothing and textiles technology or materials and polymer sciences. A postgraduate textiles/clothing qualification can be helpful for graduates from other relevant disciplines, as can industrial experience gained via vacation work, placements and final year projects or by working at a junior level. Take a look at our guide to retail work experience to help you explore your options.

Key skills for clothing and textile technologists
Creativity
A good knowledge of fabric and materials
Commercial awareness
Interpersonal skills
The ability to work well in teams