Community workers help to improve the lives of disadvantaged individuals and groups by facilitating change and providing the means for self-help within community settings.

Community workers help those who are marginalised and excluded from society to change their situation and tackle the problems that face their community. They sometimes work with communities as a whole, but they may also focus on specific groups, such as women and travellers. Community workers operate in teams, liaising closely with the police, social workers, teachers, local authorities, probation officers and other agencies. They represent the voices and needs of target groups and disadvantaged communities to policy makers at local and national level. Their typical responsibilities include:

working with community groups providing a range of activities
identifying and building on communities’ assets and capacities
helping communities to share knowledge and resources effectively
setting up new services by liaison with interested groups
recruiting and training paid and voluntary staff
attending meetings and presenting verbal and written reports
managing finance and payroll
making funding applications
facilitating self-help in the community
Local travel can be a regular feature of the job, although overseas travel is rare. Overseas work is possible however with organisations such as Goal.

The job of a community worker can require regular unsocial hours including evenings and weekends. Community workers operate mainly in disadvantaged communities within inner-city areas, rural areas and small towns.

Typical employers of community workers
Community work organisations and agencies include:

community development projects
local urban and rural development groups
organisations concerned with particular groups (women, travellers, new communities) or issues (unemployment, migrant rights, drugs, poverty)
Career development in community work can be somewhat limited as promotion usually depends on staffing levels.

Qualifications and training required
Entry into the profession is possible for both university graduates and school leavers, although a recognised qualification in community development work (such as undergraduate certificates/diplomas or primary degrees, or postgraduate/higher diplomas or masters degrees) may be beneficial.

While opportunities are open to graduates from all disciplines, those with appropriate degrees are more likely to be accepted onto a postgraduate programme. Relevant subjects include:

social sciences
social or public administration
anthropology
economics
political science
social work
sociology
psychology
town planning
Applicants for postgraduate programmes will normally need to have experience of working with communities, neighbourhood groups, youth organisations or other similar groups.

Newly-qualified community workers will normally train on the job with the support of experienced colleagues and continuing professional development will be made available through a range of courses, seminars and conferences.

In line with national provisions for the protection of children and vulnerable adults, applicants for jobs and training programmes will normally be required to undergo checks with the Criminal Records Bureau.

Key skills for community workers
Ability to relate to people from a wide range of backgrounds and to engage with target groups
In-depth understanding of related policies
Excellent written and oral communication skills including report writing
Commitment and enthusiasm
Good leadership, motivational and organisational skills
Capable of working both on own initiative and as part of a team
Sincerity, patience, tact and the ability to earn the trust of others
Excellent listening skills and confidence in talking to people both in groups and on a one-to-one basis