Commissioning engineers work at a client's site, where they are responsible for commissioning and overseeing the installation of systems, plants and equipment.

Commissioning engineers help to make sure that the products they are responsible for work properly and that they meet the client’s needs. Typical tasks include:

making improvements to, and offering advice about, operational procedures
scheduling and coordinating work to tight deadlines
ensuring that equipment works to its specification
creating and carrying out test procedures
investigating problems and diagnosing and repairing faults
troubleshooting
liaising with installation/project engineers
supervising engineering and technical staff
writing reports and documentation
providing technical support
ensuring safe working conditions
training maintenance and operative staff where appropriate.
Typical employers of commissioning engineers
Companies that manufacture/operate mechanical, electronic and electrical systems, equipment and machinery
Building services companies
Engineering contractors
Consultancies
Jobs are advertised in newspapers, online, by specialist recruitment agencies and in several engineering journals including TARGETjobs Engineering, The Engineer, The Chemical Engineer, Electrical Contracting News, Electronics Weekly, Electronic Engineering Times, Engineering News and Manufacturing Engineering.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
For entry into the profession, you will need a degree in an appropriate engineering discipline such as electrical, mechanical or civil engineering. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

A relevant postgraduate qualification can be helpful and may be necessary for some posts. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate study to explore your options.

Practical work experience is often required and can be gained via degree sponsorship, vacation work, industrial placements and graduate engineering training schemes. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree with honours in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for commissioning engineers
Excellent interpersonal and communication skills
Leadership and managerial skills
Commercially awareness
The ability to work well under pressure
Teamworking skills
Relevant technical expertise (for example in test, design, development and operations)
Good IT and analytical skills.
The ability to cope with shift work and unsocial hours, which are often required where equipment is in 24-hour operation