Scene of crime officers are responsible for collecting, processing and preserving forensic, photographic and fingerprint evidence from crime scenes, post mortem and accidents.

A scene of crime officer works alongside police officers to help solve crimes. Their role is to locate, collect, preserve and catalogue evidence from a crime scene. They are also known as crime scene investigators (CSIs). A scene of crime officer will work on a wide variety of crime scenes, from burglaries and vandalism to murders and sexual offences.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

responding to and prioritising calls from police officers
taking charge of crime scenes
establishing what evidence is required from incident scenes and how best to obtain it
taking, developing and printing photographs of the scene
gathering forensic evidence such as samples of blood, hair, footprints, tyre marks etc, using appropriate scientific techniques
obtaining impressions of fingerprints from prisoners, dead bodies or from people who may have accessed the crime scene
placing evidence into protective packaging and sending it away for forensic analysis
preserving crime scenes against contamination
compiling written reports
giving and defending evidence in court
Applicants should be capable of concentrating on the task in hand despite the difficult circumstances that a crime scene may present.

Typical employers of scene of crime officers
Scene of crime officers (SOCO) are employed by individual police forces throughout the UK. Although a few are police officers, most are civilians. They are based in police force headquarters or divisional stations but spend most of their time attending investigations.

Opportunities are advertised online, in newspapers, local authority job lists, and in professional journals such as New Scientist as well as their online equivalents. Gaining relevant work experience via placements, work shadowing or networking is advisable. Further information about the job and entry requirements can be obtained from local police force headquarters.

Qualifications and training required
It’s possible to become a crime scene officer both with or without a degree. However, while it’s not necessary to have a degree, it might be beneficial to have one in a science subject or in forensics. Good photographic ability is important and a qualification in photography can prove advantageous.

Entrance requirements vary between individual forces – but most expect candidates to possess good GCSEs or A levels, at least. Many employers will also ask that you have relevant work experience in policing or a related sector. Accurate colour vision and physical fitness are essential. A driving licence, as you will be visiting crime scenes.

Key skills for scene of crime officers
Able to cope well with pressure
Able to deal with witnessing upsetting scenes
Patience
A logical and enquiring mind
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent written and oral communication skills
Good teamworking and problem solving abilities
Good people skills