Customs officers are responsible for helping to prevent the importation of illegal and/or dangerous goods including firearms, drugs, alcohol, tobacco and endangered animals into the country.

Customs officers are employed by HM Revenue & Customs and work in UK ports and airports. They are also known as customs and excise officers. Typical responsibilities of the job include:

identifying people to question on the basis of prior offences/likely risk etc
searching baggage and individuals for smuggled items
making arrests of people suspected of smuggling
seizing smuggled goods
checking documentation relating to imported goods
detecting and prosecuting drug smugglers
collecting and supplying trade statistics
writing reports
fighting the increasing problem of alcohol and tobacco smuggling
helping to combat the worldwide illegal trade in endangered species of animals and birds
dealing with revenue due on imported goods
Customs officers can work in noisy, dirty or dangerous conditions, and they enforce legislation.

Vacancies attract intense competition and candidates possessing relevant work experience are often at an advantage. Job vacancies are advertised by careers services, via the internet, in newspapers and in online publications such as Opportunities. Information about vacancies is available centrally, although each Customs and Excise area undertakes its own recruitment.

Qualifications and training required
It’s possible to become a customs officer both with or without a degree.

The minimum academic requirement for entry into the profession is two GCSEs or the equivalent, with which you can join HMRC as an administrative assistant. If you have five GCSEs you can join HMRC as an assistant customs officer. To join at the level of officer you need five GCSEs and two A levels or equivalent qualifications. You should check vacancies on an individual bases, as qualification requirements could vary depending on location.

Graduates with an honours degree in any subject (2.2 or higher) can apply through the fast-track graduate recruitment scheme, details of which are available from the HM Revenue & Customs website.

Experience of and/or a qualification in legal studies or European/non-European languages may be beneficial. A relevant postgraduate qualification and/or work experience may be required for some positions.

Key skills for customs officers
All candidates should be free from certain criminal convictions. Customs officers need to be calm, assertive and resilient, and must possess excellent communication, teamworking and interpersonal skills.