Cyber security is fast becoming one of the most important roles in the tech sector as cyber criminals and hackers become ever more sophisticated.

Any computer connected to the internet is vulnerable to cyber attacks. Cyber security, or IT security, is the technique used to protect computers and networks from criminal intrusion. Specialists in cyber security are among the most sought-after professionals in the tech sector as businesses and governments seek to fight off an increasingly daring and ruthless cohort of global cyber criminals and hackers. Skilled and dedicated security specialists work in this field that demands a mix of artistry and technical expertise. They need to be constantly one step ahead of the hackers and organised criminals behind a new crime wave.

There is increased potential for career progression, especially in larger organisations and financial service providers. There is also scope for experienced security professionals to go into business for themselves as consultants. You can find out more about cyber security as an area of work, from an industry expert, here.

Typical duties include:

seeking to build in security during the development stages of software systems, networks and data centres
looking for vulnerabilities and risks in hardware and software
finding the best way to secure the IT infrastructure of an organisation
building firewalls into network infrastructures
constantly monitoring for attacks and intrusions
when the cyber security specialist finds a potential threat or attempted breach, closing off the security vulnerability
identifying the perpetrator and liaising with the police if necessary
Typical employers of cyber security specialists
Network providers
The government
Banks
Schools and universities
Airlines
Any large organisation with a database
Security consultancy firms
Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and by recruitment agencies.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
Both university graduates and school leavers can enter the cyber security profession. Graduates tend to need a degree related to computer science or in a STEM subject.

A number of employers run apprenticeships in cyber security, some of which involve studying towards a degree at the same time as working. 

Read our IT graduate salaries article to find out how much you could earn in IT.
Key skills for cyber security specialists
Strong IT skills and knowledge including hardware, software and networks
Meticulous attention to detail
Ability to use logic and reasoning to identify the strengths and weaknesses of IT systems
A forensic approach to challenges
A deep understanding of how hackers work and ability to keep up with the fast pace of change in the criminal cyber-underworld
Ability to seek out vulnerabilities in IT infrastructures