Data analysts collect, organise and interpret statistical information to make it useful for a range of businesses and organisations.

A data analyst is someone who scrutinises information using data analysis tools. The meaningful results they pull from the raw data help their employers or clients make important decisions by identifying various facts and trends. Typical duties include:

using advanced computerised models to extract the data needed
removing corrupted data
performing initial analysis to assess the quality of the data
performing further analysis to determine the meaning of the data
performing final analysis to provide additional data screening
preparing reports based on analysis and presenting to management
Typical employers of data analysts
Banks
Specialist software development companies
Consultancies
Telecommunications companies
Public sector organisations
Social media specialists
Colleges and universities
Pharmaceutical companies
Manufacturers
Qualifications and training required
Both university graduates and school leavers can enter the data analysis profession.

For graduates, the usual entry point is a degree in statistics, mathematics or a related subject involving maths, such as economics or data science. Other degrees are also acceptable if they include informal training in statistics as part of the course, for instance sociology or informatics.

It is possible to enter this career without a degree. Data analyst apprenticeships are available with a range of employers. You will often need A levels (or equivalent) to apply.

Read our IT graduate salaries article to find out how much you could earn in IT.
Key skills for a data analyst
A high level of mathematical ability
Programming languages, such as SQL, Oracle and Python
The ability to analyse, model and interpret data
Problem-solving skills
A methodical and logical approach
The ability to plan work and meet deadlines
Accuracy and attention to detail
Interpersonal skills
Teamworking skills
Written and verbal communication skills