A career as a design engineer is all about transforming ideas into real products. It offers the chance to combine creativity with engineering expertise.

Design engineers study, research and develop ideas for new products and the systems used to make them. They also modify existing products or processes to increase efficiency or improve performance. They work on almost every consumer product imaginable for large-scale production, from telephones and medical equipment to kitchen appliances and car engines.

Design engineers are not only concerned with making products that look good and are easy and safe to use: they are also concerned with ensuring that the product can be made cost-effectively and efficiently. Typical tasks include:

studying a design brief
thinking of possible design solutions
researching whether the design will work and be cost-effective
assessing the usability, environmental impact and safety of a design
using computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-assisted engineering (CAE) software to create prototypes
collecting and analysing data from tests on prototypes
modifying designs and retesting them
writing regular progress reports and presenting them to project managers and clients
With experience, your career can lead to senior design positions in larger organisations and then on to posts as creative director. Design engineers can also move into management roles such as project management and new business development.

Typical employers of design engineers
Design consultancy firms
Large manufacturing companies
Biomedical companies
Engineering companies
Consumer goods manufacturers
For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a design engineering career for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant engineering discipline such as design engineering, electronics engineering, industrial design, mechanical engineering and product design engineering. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees

The fastest route to gaining chartered status is to take an accredited MEng degree, followed by at least four years’ vocational training with an accredited employer. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Relevant experience can be helpful; many employers offer final-year project work, sponsorship, vacation work and industrial placements, which can provide valuable contacts and a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Key skills for design engineers
Strong maths and IT skills
A creative flair and design ability
Good visual and spatial awareness
Attention to detail
Problem solving
Written and oral communication
Commercial awareness
Excellent project management skills
Time management and organisational skills