Editorial assistants support editorial staff in the production and publishing of journals, magazines, books and digital products.

The majority of would-be editors begin their careers as editorial assistants, progressing through the editorial ranks once relevant skills and experience have been gained. Much of the work includes the following routine editorial duties:

writing and editing copy
proofreading and fact checking articles
interviewing contributors
researching images
calculating expenditure
planning and organising projects
researching and commissioning features and new titles
commissioning articles
liaising with authors, marketing staff, designers and printers.
Typical employers of editorial assistants
Publishing houses
Magazines
Local and national newspapers
Press agencies
Academic journals
Professional associations
Large businesses with ‘in-house' magazines
Freelance editorial and proofreading work is also available if you can build up a network of contacts. Vacancies are advertised in local and national newspapers, relevant publications such as The Bookseller, Campaign and Print Week, their online equivalents, and on TARGETjobs. Advertised vacancies attract intense competition, so networking, job shadowing and speculative applications are advisable. Find out more about how to make speculative applications.

Qualifications and training required
Although you don’t technically need a degree to get into editorial, entry into the profession without a degree is unusual.

Any degree discipline is acceptable for entry into the profession, although a relevant qualification such as journalism, media studies or English can help. Specialist knowledge such as a science or languages background may be necessary for some opportunities. Previous writing or editing experience is essential.

Key skills for editorial assistants
Excellent verbal and written communication skills
Adaptability
Ability to work well under pressure and meet deadlines
Proficiency with IT packages like Microsoft Office and Adobe Creative Suite
Proofreading skills
Attention to detail