Educational psychologists work with, observe and assess the behavioural, social, emotional and educational problems and needs of children and young people below the age of 19 years.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

using psychological tests, theories and procedures
recommending, developing and administering appropriate therapies and strategies
carrying out psychological assessments to uncover a child's problem
writing reports
conducting research
providing training
meeting, advising and liaising with parents, teachers and other professionals
advising and making recommendations on educational policies
The work commonly requires local travel to visit clients in their homes or in schools, colleges and nurseries. Regularly dealing with the problems faced by children and young people can make the job stressful and emotionally demanding.

Typical employers of educational psychologists
The majority of educational psychologists are employed by local authorities. Other employers include: consultancies, social services departments, universities, child psychiatric units, paediatric assessment units, independent schools and voluntary organisations. There is strong competition for training places. Opportunities are advertised in national newspapers, the Times Educational Supplement, the AEP Broadsheet, Psychologist Appointments and their respective websites.

Qualifications and training required
A lengthy period of study and vocational training is required for qualification. You'll need a British Psychological Society accredited degree followed by a three-year professional doctorate that combines practical experience with academic knowledge. Applications for doctorates in England are made through the Association of Educational Psychologists. In Scotland, the postgraduate element of study and training is an accredited masters course in educational psychology followed by a further qualification in educational psychology.

Educational psychologists are registered and regulated by the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

Key skills for educational psychologists
The ability to relate to children and young adults
Sensitivity
Ability to cope with emotional situations
Excellent listening
Observational skills
Verbal communication skills
Empathy and rapport