Education administrators help to ensure the efficient and cost-effective running of higher, further, tertiary and private education institutions through a range of secretarial, administrative, supportive and financial duties.

Education administrators often work within the central administrative (academic registrars) department and for individual faculties, departments and sections of universities and colleges of further and higher education. Opportunities also arise within private, tertiary and specialist training colleges. There is no ‘typical' job profile: administrators may have student recruitment, funding, quality assurance, marketing, or public relations roles, or they may be responsible for budgetary/financial administration, project management or human resources management. Many work in a general capacity – undertaking tasks from all of these areas.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

handling correspondence
organising and servicing committee and academic board meetings (producing agendas, taking minutes etc)
researching and writing reports
preparing statistics and handling data, such as attendance figures
processing invoices
purchasing equipment/other goods
liaising with potential students, other institutions, government departments and external organisations
helping with course approval and evaluation activities
formulating and implementing regulations/policies
timetabling and planning events
administering and coordinating student recruitment, examinations and assessment activities
The job can be busy at key times in the academic year, when some long hours may be necessary. There are good opportunities for career progression via promotion into senior administrative, managerial and project management roles, or transfer/secondment between departments.

Vacancies are advertised by careers services, in local and national newspapers (particularly The Guardian), in the Times Educational Supplement and in Times Higher Education, plus their online equivalents.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a career in educational administration for both university graduates and school leavers. A good higher national diploma or honours degree in any subject can be helpful for entry into the profession.

Qualifications in education, English, psychology, sociology, business studies, statistics, IT, administration or management may be beneficial. Previous higher/further education, office or commercial work experience can also be helpful.

Key skills for education administrators
Good interpersonal, IT, numeracy, organisational, time management, negotiation and communication skills are essential. A polite telephone manner and discretion when dealing with confidential information is also very important.