Energy conservation officers generate energy efficiency improvements in public, private and commercial buildings via a range of methods including practical solutions, education and the promotion of renewable energy sources.

Most energy conservation officers are employed by health trusts, utilities, charities, energy partnerships/agencies and within the housing or environmental health departments of local authorities.

Key responsibilities of the job include:

visiting local businesses, landlords, home owners and tenants as appropriate
providing energy efficiency advice and training
promoting energy conservation schemes (such as energy efficiency housing grants)
liaising with contractors, local organisations, council services and voluntary/community groups
developing, implementing and monitoring energy consumption reduction policies and strategies
producing specifications, estimates, drawings, feasibility studies, tender documents and work schedules
analysing data and collating information
maintaining accurate records
writing plans and reports
attending regional meetings and events
preparing and distributing publicity materials
undertaking energy suveys/site inspections
keeping up to date with changes in legislation and initiatives, including EU energy performance directives
promoting energy conservation awareness via events such as presentations, workshops and conservation projects
Energy conservation is currently a small profession with a limited number of opportunities. Consequently vacancies tend to attract strong competition. Opportunities are advertised via the internet, in newspapers, local authority vacancy lists and publications such as New Scientist and Opportunities.

Qualifications and training required
To become an energy conservation officer it is usually necessary to possess an appropriate degree/HND gained in a subject such as energy engineering, environmental health, environmental sciences/management, surveying or engineering. A driving licence and health and safety training can be helpful, as can a relevant postgraduate qualification, experience of initiating and managing projects and supervising others.

Key skills for energy conservation officers
Candidates should possess confidence, initiative, and excellent IT and organisational skills. Communication skills are also important: energy conservation officers have to explain technical information to people without technical knowledge. Candidates should also be able to demonstrate a genuine interest and understanding of the energy market, including renewable energy sources and legislation.