Forensic scientists use analytical and scientific techniques to examine evidence from crimes and prepare legal statements that summarise the results for court cases.

The majority of a forensic scientist’s work is laboratory-based; they examine traces of substances such as blood, hairs, textile fibres, paint, glass, explosives and drugs in an attempt to associate or disassociate suspects with victims or crime scenes. Other responsibilities and areas of forensics can include:

searching for and collecting evidence at the scenes of crimes
compiling written reports
gathering evidence
verifying the authenticity of documents
testing fluid and tissue samples for the use of drugs or poisons
analysing tool and tyre marks
giving and defending evidence in court
recovering data from electronic equipment such as laptops, computers and mobile phones
using appropriate analytical techniques such as chromatography, electron microscopy and DNA profiling
The work can require attending unpleasant and disturbing crime scenes in all weathers.

Typical employers of forensic scientists
Forensic scientists are employed by specialist private consultancies, police forces , universities and government departments including the Defence, Science and Technology Laboratory, the Centre for Applied Science and Technology, and Forensic Science Northern Ireland.

There is strong competition for the small number of vacancies available each year. Consequently, it may be necessary to enter the profession at a junior level (such as assistant forensic scientist). Vacancies are advertised online, in local, national and regional newspapers and in scientific journals such as New Scientist. Speculative applications are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
To become a forensic scientist, a degree in forensic science or another science subject is necessary. Postgraduate study in forensic science is often required, especially after studying a general science subject at undergraduate level. A range of degree courses are accredited by The Chartered Society of Forensic Sciences. 

Whether you have a forensic science or a general science degree, check potential employers exact requirements as not all science-based subjects guarantee entry into the profession.
Relevant experience can be difficult to acquire as forensic laboratories do not offer placements, so experience gained using similar scientific and analytical techniques can be useful.

Key skills for forensic scientists
Logical and independent mind
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent written and oral communication skills
Objectivity and sensitivity when dealing with confidential information
Ability to work under pressure and to a deadline
Concentration and patience
Ability to deal with stressful and emotional situations
Confidence in your own judgement
