General practitioners provide confidential patient consultations and initial medical care within a community-based setting.

General practitioners (GPs) have knowledge of a broad range of illnesses, and treat patients of all ages.

Typical responsibilities include:

patient consultations at home and within the surgery
physical examinations
diagnosis and treatment of illnesses/ailments
minor surgery
health education
practice management and administration
liaising with other healthcare professionals and/or hospitals
The job can be demanding but it is nevertheless rewarding and highly respected and it gives more opportunity for flexible or part-time work than other specialisms. Career advancement is possible via hospital work, research or teaching.

Typical employers of GPs
GPs are employed by the NHS as independent contractors to work within local communities.

Publications advertising vacancies include General Practitioner, British Medical Journal and The Lancet. There are also job listings online via the NHS.

Qualification and training required
It is only possible to qualify as a GP with a medical degree and further training.

Qualification as a GP is a lengthy process. Initially it is necessary to undertake a-five year medical degree which is approved by the General Medical Council. This is followed by compulsory hospital and general practice-based vocational training through the two-year foundation programme. The final stage is speciality training for general practice, which takes a minimum of three years. Additionally, many doctors sit an examination or submit a portfolio to gain membership of the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). Subsequent professional updating, such as attending lectures, conferences and meetings is also a key feature of the job.

Graduates from a non-medical background wishing to become a GP must follow the same route, but can take the shorter, more intensive graduate medical degree. Most universities ask for graduates to possess at least a 2.1 degree, preferably in a scientific subject. A graduate who doesn't match these criteria could take an 'Access to Medicine' course before applying. They must also have good academic references, be highly motivated and possess appropriate personal characteristics such as perseverance and energy.

Key skills for general practitioners
Ability to work long hours, often under pressure
Good practical skills
Communication skills, compassion and a good bedside manner
Ability to solve problems and effective decision-making skills
Drive to continue learning throughout career