Working from agreed design briefs, graphic designers use text and images to communicate information and ideas.

Graphic designers/artists design graphics for use in media products such as magazines, labels, advertising and signage. Typical activities include:

liaising with clients to determine their requirements and budget
managing client proposals from typesetting through to design, print and production
working with clients, briefing and advising them with regard to design style, format, print production and timescales
developing concepts, graphics and layouts for product illustrations, company logos, and websites
determining size and arrangement of illustrative material and copy, and font style and size
preparing rough drafts of material based on an agreed brief
reviewing final layouts and suggesting improvements if required
liaising with external printers on a regular basis to ensure deadlines are met and material is printed to the highest quality.
Graphic designers work mainly nine-to-five, but deadlines may require working additional hours. Opportunities for graphic designers exist in cities throughout the country, although freelance designers can work from home.

Career development will more than likely require frequent job movement to widen your experience and develop your portfolio.

Typical employers of graphic designers
Advertising agencies
Large print houses
Brand agencies
Signage companies
Book, magazine and newspaper publishers
Multimedia companies including the games industry and web development
Television and broadcasting companies
The packaging industry
In-house graphic design services of major national and international organisations and companies
Qualifications and training required
While entry is open to non-graduates, preference will be given to those with relevant degrees. A degree in graphic design is advantageous although other art and design subjects will be accepted. A range of relevant postgraduate programmes are also available in many higher education institutions.

You will need work experience and a portfolio of work to show employers. This can be obtained through internships and holiday work. Employers also expect a good knowledge of design software, such as Quark Xpress, InDesign or Illustrator plus photo-editing software, such as PhotoShop.

Vacancies for graphic designers attract strong competition so speculative applications are advisable.

Key skills for graphic designers
Excellent IT skills, especially with design and photo-editing software
Exceptional creativity and innovation
Excellent time management and organisational skills
Accuracy and attention to detail
An understanding of the latest trends and their role within a commercial environment
Professional approach to time, costs and deadlines