Health service managers are responsible for the strategic, financial and day-to-day management of general practitioner, local authority and hospital health services.

Some health service managers specialise in a specific area such as finance, human resources or IT. Key responsibilities of the job include:

directing, coordinating and administering medical and non-medical resources, facilities and services
liaising with clerical, medical and professional staff at all levels
developing services and implementing changes
recruiting staff
attending meetings
writing reports
managing budgets
dealing with complaints or problems
ensuring services meet national standards
Typical employers of health service managers
The National Health Service (NHS) and private clinics and hospitals employ health service managers.

NHS management training scheme vacancies attract strong competition. The selection process includes a two-day assessment centre, which consists of written and psychometric tests, panel interviews and group exercises.

Opportunities are advertised on the NHS website, by careers services, in local, regional and national newspapers and in Health Service Journal.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into health service management for both graduates and school leavers.

For graduates, the NHS management training scheme is the most common route into the profession, and provides an initial training programme and excellent opportunities for promotion into senior managerial and specialist roles. The finance stream lasts two and a half years, while the other streams, including general management, HR management and health informatics management, last two years.

Any degree discipline is acceptable for entry: relevant skills and personality are usually more important than subject studied. A business, economics, or management qualification can be helpful however, as can any related work experience. The latter may be gained via speculative applications, for which the NHS Handbook and the list of authorities and trusts available on the NHS website contain useful contact information.

Key skills for health service managers
Employers seek motivated candidates who are adaptable and capable of working well under pressure, with excellent teamwork, analytical and managerial skills. Good verbal and written communication skills are essential, as is a mature, confident and sensitive manner.