Herbalists treat a variety of physical conditions, illnesses and allergies through the holistic use of plants in conjunction with medical knowledge.

Herbalists treat patients using plant-based remedies and other treatments. Responsibilities of the job typically include:

undertaking patient consultations to diagnose illnesses and conditions, and to select appropriate remedies
gaining information from patients about previous physical/medical history and symptoms
making physical assessments
planning and explaining treatment requirements
liaising with and making referrals to specialists or other health care practitioners
providing advice about diet, exercise and lifestyle
keeping accurate and confidential patient records
keeping up-to-date with new research and developments in the profession
managing stock levels
marketing and promoting the business
growing and producing herbal remedies
Typical employers of herbalists
Most herbalists are self-employed, working full or part-time from home or from their own practice. Many work as part of a team of alternative health practitioners for private practices such as specialist and complementary health care clinics and herbal dispensaries. Membership with the National Institute of Medical Herbalists (NIMH) allows you to list your services on the website.

A very limited amount of contract work may be advertised via the internet. Herbalists may go into teaching or research with experience.

Qualifications and training required
To qualify as a medical herbalist it is necessary to obtain membership of the NIMH or another organisation represented by the European Herbal and Traditional Medicine Practitioners’ Association. In order to register, successful completion of an accredited course is usually required; however, NIMH is currently developing a system that considers applicants who have not completed an accredited course but have relevant experience.

Undergraduate herbalist courses take three to four years of full-time study to complete. When applying for postgraduate study, undergraduate qualifications in pharmacy, physiology, anatomy, biology, pharmacology, medicine and botany are of benefit.

Pre-entry experience gained working in a clinic or dispensary is helpful, as is job shadowing local herbalists.

Key skills for herbalists
It is necessary to have a good understanding of anatomy and physiology, in addition to detailed knowledge of herbs and their preparation. Excellent interpersonal, listening and communication skills are essential when dealing with patients. As herbalists are often self-employed, strong business skills and organisational ability are of benefit. Herbalists also need to possess a mature, confident, sensitive and resilient temperament.