Hospital doctors diagnose and treat medical conditions, disorders, and diseases through the application of specialist medical skills and knowledge.

Specific responsibilities vary greatly depending on the area of specialism. However, generic duties of the job include:

undertaking patient consultations and physical examinations
organising workloads
performing surgical procedures
providing general pre- and post-operative care
monitoring and administering medication
assessing and planning treatment requirements
liaising daily with staff including other doctors, non-medical management staff and healthcare professionals
writing reports and maintaining records
promoting health education
Typical employers of hospital doctors
Doctors are employed by the NHS, private sector hospitals, charitable/voluntary organisations and the armed forces.

Vacancies for hospital doctors are advertised online on the NHS website, in national newspapers and publications such as British Medical Journal.

Qualification and training required
You can only become a doctor with a relevant degree and training.

The first stage of qualification is undergraduate medical education at a medical school attached to a university. Applications to most medical schools are made through UCAS and should be submitted in the autumn of the year before the course starts. The standard length of this stage is five years. However, graduates may be able to take an accelerated four-year course, which requires at least a 2.1 degree, preferably in a scientific subject. A graduate who doesn't match these criteria could take an 'Access to Medicine' course.

The next stage is the two-year foundation programme, entered via a national application process that is largely online.

The final stage is core speciality or run-through training, when doctors specialise in areas such as paediatrics, emergency medicine or neurosurgery. This takes five to seven years depending on the speciality and doctors are awarded a certificate of completion training when they have satisfied the assessment requirements.

Key skills for hospital doctors
Ability to work long hours, often under pressure
Good practical skills
Ability to solve problems
Effective decision-making skills
Leadership and management skills
Communication skills, compassion and a good bedside manner
Drive to continue learning throughout career