Human resources (HR) officers are responsible for hiring, developing and looking after employees. This involves functions such as training and monitoring performance.

HR officers can be generalists who perform a broad range of duties, or specialists who focus on a particular area. Specialisms include employee relations, careers coaching, health and safety and headhunting. If you want to find out about all of the specialisms on offer, head to the HR areas of work section.

Typical responsibilities include:

recruiting, training and developing staff
making sure that staff get paid correctly and on time
pensions and benefits administration
approving job descriptions and advertisements
looking after the health, safety and welfare of all employees
organising staff training sessions and activities
monitoring staff performance and attendance
advising line managers and other employees on employment law and the employer's own employment policies and procedures
ensuring candidates have the right to work at the organisation
negotiating salaries, contracts, working conditions or redundancy packages with staff and representatives.
While a general HR officer will take on a mixture of these responsibilities, larger organisations often recruit specialist staff to take on one of these responsibilities as their entire role.

Read our article on whether a career in HR is right for you to find out more about what this career involves.

Typical employers of HR officers
Any organisation will require a HR officer. Smaller companies may have only one HR officer, while larger companies and public sector organisations will have HR departments.

Typical employers can include:

Manufacturers
Retailers
Banks
Local authorities
Industrial organisations
Charities
HR agencies
Vacancies are advertised at TARGETjobs, in careers services, national newspapers and in specialist publications such as Personnel Today, People Management and their respective websites. Recruitment agencies, local newspapers and job centres often advertise immediate/junior vacancies. There are also graduate training schemes offered by many organisations in this area of work. Take a look at our list of employers who offer HR graduate training schemes.

Qualifications and training required
A degree or higher national diploma (HND) in a relevant subject such as HR management or business may be required for some posts. However, some HR graduate schemes welcome applicants from any degree discipline.

It is possible to enter a career in HR by completing a relevant apprenticeship, such as a higher apprenticeship in HR management.

Some employers may also ask that you have a professional qualification in HR management. A list of courses is available on the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development’s (CIPD’s) website. A postgraduate qualification in HR management may be advantageous.

Membership with the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) offers opportunities for continuing professional development (CPD) and can help to show your commitment to your field. You can become a member by obtaining a CIPD qualification or through experience assessment, where you use your experience from the past three years to gain professional recognition.

Relevant experience is often essential and can be gained in any commercial area through placements or vacation work. It may be necessary to enter the profession at a junior level, or to move into HR work following a general management training scheme.

Key skills for HR officers
Commercial awareness
Effective organisational skills
Ability to form working relationships with people at all levels
Teamwork skills
Interpersonal skills
Meticulous attention to detail
Numerical skills
IT skills