Hydrologists research, develop and maintain safe and sustainable domestic or natural water management strategies.

Hydrologists apply scientific knowledge and mathematical principles to solve water-related problems such as quantity, quality and availability. Hydrologists could work on finding new water sources, predicting droughts or floods and reducing waste water.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

studying relationships between soil and rock features, rainfall and water run-off
using specialist computer modelling applications
recording and analysing water resource systems data
employing statistical and hydrological modelling techniques
determining the most effective water management methods
assessing the impact of environmental changes and land use changes
predicting and monitoring rainfall, water yields and usage
liaising with clients, consultants, water regulators, researchers, external bodies and other professionals
managing on-site data collection
forecasting floods
producing water and drought management plans
ensuring appropriate regulations are implemented
keeping up to date with scientific and technical developments
making presentations
supervising the work of hydrometrists and other staff
Typical employers of hydrologists
Environmental bodies
The Environment Agency
National government
Regional councils
Public authorities
Water or sewerage utility companies
Research and development organisations
The Natural Environment Research Council
Consultancies
Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies, in national newspapers and in relevant scientific publications. Speculative applications are recommended – directories including Water Yearbook, the ENDS Environmental Consultancy Directory and Water UK provide details of water supply and sewerage companies.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
A strong academic background is essential for all candidates. You will need a degree in an appropriate subject, eg geography, engineering, science, maths, or environmental studies. A relevant postgraduate qualification is also beneficial, particularly for research positions. The British Hydrological Society, together with the JBA Trust, provides a small number of studentships to help towards the costs of an Msc/MRes in a hydrology-related subject at a UK Higher Education Institution.

Pre-entry work experience can be difficult to obtain but is helpful for entry into the profession.

Key skills for hydrologists
Project management
Problem solving
Organisation
Teamworking
Communication skills
Good computing ability
Mathematical skills