Illustrators are commissioned to produce still drawings for use in advertisements, books, magazines, packaging, greetings cards and newspapers.

Most illustrators are self-employed, running their own studios or working from home. They are normally commissioned directly or via an agent to produce drawings for newspapers, magazines, books, and catalogues.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

liaising with editors, authors or designers
negotiating contracts and timescales
undertaking relevant research and generating ideas
drawing rough sketches for approval
producing final illustrations
promoting and running the business.
Whereas graphic designers work on the bigger picture, eg page layout, illustrators do more drawing, though there can be some overlap between the two, particularly when working for a smaller employer.

Typical employers of illustrators
Illustrators may be employed by design consultancies, advertising agencies or publishers.

Vacancies appear in national newspapers and publications including Design Week and Creative Review, both their online and print versions.

Freelance illustrators can register with the Association of Illustrators to be added to its database or they can contact potential clients directly via the Writers’ and Artists’ Yearbook. Read more on making speculative applications.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into illustration for both university graduates and school leavers.

Although there are no formal academic requirements for entry into the profession, fine art, illustration and graphic design qualifications may be helpful. Postgraduate courses may be beneficial and are available in subjects such as children’s book illustration, medical art, graphic design and illustration. However, aptitude, relevant experience and artistic abilities are generally considered by employers to be more important. It is essential to prepare a sound portfolio of work that can be used to demonstrate abilities.

In terms of progression, illustrators may specialise in a certain area, such as children’s literature or medical art.

Key skills for illustrators
Freelance illustrators have to be keen networkers to build up a number of contacts and have good business skills. Communication skills are important; you need to be able to discuss what is needed with clients. Being able to work to a brief is equally essential. You also need to be able to work within an agreed time frame and meet deadlines. Above all, illustrators are creative with excellent artistic skills.