Immigration officers are responsible for helping to maintain effective immigration control by checking the eligibility of passengers to enter the UK at entry points, such as Gatwick and Dover.

Immigration officers are involved in ensuring the UK immigration laws are adhered to. They check the passports and visas of people entering the UK and establish whether the visitor meets the criteria for entry or should be refused.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

observing passengers passing through passport control areas
examining passports
conducting interviews
taking fingerprints
carrying out surveillance
organising the removal of passengers who fail to qualify for entry
collecting statistics
writing reports
Since the job is linked to borders and ports, you may need to relocate in order to be able to reach your jurisdiction effectively. You may also be required to work nights and some weekends. Working hours are usually flexible.

Typical employers of immigration officers
Immigration Officers are employed by UK Visas and Immigration (formerly the UK Border Agency), within the Civil Service, and are based at UK ports, airports and the Channel Tunnel.

Vacancies can be found directly on the Civil Service website as well as in newspapers and with careers services.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into becoming an immigration officer for both graduates and school leavers.

There are no set qualification requirements for becoming an immigration officer, so graduates can have a degree in any subject. However, qualifications in languages or legal studies can prove advantageous. You will also need good A Level and GCSE results. All candidates should be British nationals. It is also necessary to pass security clearance and medical checks and to have been resident in the UK continuously for the previous three years. New recruits receive an initial period of training that takes at least nine weeks.

Key skills for immigration officers
Immigration officers need to be assertive and have confidence in their own judgement while being fair and impartial. They need to be quick-thinking and observant to stop potential illegal immigrants. They have excellent communication and interpersonal skills as they regularly deal with international visitors with limited English language ability. They can be firm yet polite with people who may be frightened or aggressive. They are able to work independently as well as part of a team.