Immunologists investigate the human immune system and to develop new treatments, therapies or vaccines to control infections, illnesses and cancer.

Immunologists are scientists or clinicians who specialise in the body’s defence system. The work may be laboratory-based or patient-facing.

Responsibilities in laboratory-based work include:

undertaking original medical research
designing, planning and carrying out controlled experiments and trials
devising and testing hypotheses using appropriate analytical techniques
analysing and interpreting data
writing reports, reviews and papers
applying for research funding
attending conferences throughout the world
keeping up to date with current research within the field
Responsibilities in patient-facing work include:

diagnosing and treating patients with immune disorders or allergies
prescribing drugs and therapies
analysing patient samples
monitoring transplant patients
giving advice to other medical staff about tests and treatments
Typical employers of immunologists
Immunologists are employed by the NHS, private healthcare groups, universities and pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies.

Vacancies are advertised online (including the NHS careers website), by recruitment agencies and careers services, in newspapers and in scientific publications such as New Scientist, Nature and Science Magazine.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
Vacancies require a good honours degree in an appropriate life, medical or physical science. Possession of a relevant postgraduate qualification is beneficial, and normally essential for research posts. 

Candidates should also possess membership to the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP) or equivalent. All candidates must have a good scientific background and practical laboratory work experience.

Key skills for immunologists
A logical and independent mind
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent written English
Communication skills
Good teamworking abilities