Information systems managers, or IT managers, are responsible for the secure and effective operation of all computer systems, related applications, hardware and software that is used within a wide range of public and private sector organisations.

Responsibilities of the job vary according to employment sector. However, typical tasks include:

managing a team of staff including programmers, analysts and support specialists
evaluating the functionality of systems
consulting computer users to ascertain needs and to ensure that facilities meet user or project requirements
selecting and purchasing appropriate hardware and software
managing IT budgets
ensuring software licensing laws are followed
implementing and managing security or integrity and backup procedures
scheduling upgrades
providing user training, support, advice and feedback
testing and modifying systems to ensure that that they operate reliably
managing secure network access for remote users
keeping up to date with new technology
designing maintenance procedures and putting them into operation
training new staff.
Typical employers for information systems managers
Financial organisations
IT companies
Management consultancy firms
Software companies
Universities
Hospitals
Local authorities
Central government
Online retailers
Any organisation that makes extensive use of computers may employ an information systems manager.

Vacancies are advertised by recruitment agencies, careers services, online, in newspapers and publications such as Computing and Computer Weekly. Further information is available in the TARGETjobs IT & Technology publication.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both school leavers and graduates.

For graduates, a degree or a higher national diploma (HND) in a relevant subject such as information technology, computer science, software engineering, management sciences or business studies is usually required. For graduates without relevant qualifications and/or experience, gaining a postgraduate computing or IT qualification can be helpful.

To become an information systems manager, candidates usually have to work their way up from an entry-level role, such as information systems officer. Such roles are often competitive, so relevant industrial experience (particularly experience gained within the fields of project management, technical support, systems programming or computer operations) is beneficial. You can achieve this through industrial placements, summer internships and insight programmes.

It is sometimes possible to enter this career without a degree or HND. 

Key skills for information systems managers
Analytical and problem solving skills
Strong technical skills
The ability to work well under pressure
Attention to detail
Teamworking skills
Organisation and time management
Interpersonal and communication skills
Management and leadership skills