Investment analysts provide stockbrokers, fund managers and stock market traders with financial information, advice and recommendations derived from global investment data.While fund managers are responsible for making decisions about investments, it is investment analysts who have the responsibility of providing information and recommendations that enable such decisions to be made.

The precise nature of the work may vary according to the type of employer. For example, some investment analysts may be employed by investment management companies and offer their expertise to fund managers in-house; others may work for investment banks and stockbrokers, providing portfolio managers or clients with their advice. However, in general investment analysts examine economic trends and their impact on investment potential. Typical tasks may include:

researching companies, particularly in terms of their financial functioning
analysing company accounts, profit and loss sheets and cash flow information
interpreting complicated financial information
writing financial research summaries
regularly meeting with company managers, stock market traders, fund managers and stockbrokers
making informed recommendations
collating detailed, up-to-date information about the UK economy and financial markets.
Investment work provides high levels of responsibility, good promotional opportunities and impressive financial rewards for the most successful employees. However, the role is demanding with long working hours, sometimes up to 12 hours per day.

Typical employers of investment analysts
Investment banks
Investment management companies
Stockbrokers
Private equity firms
Life assurance companies
Large charities
Banks, particularly in wealth management.
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies, online and in publications such as TARGETjobs Finance, Business Week, The Economist and The Banker, plus their respective websites. Undertaking sector and company research, attending presentations, networking and speculative applications are worthwhile. Early applications for vacancies are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
Investment analyst positions are more commonly open to graduates rather than school leavers. However, it may be possible for school leavers to enter the profession by starting in an administrative role within finance, and undertaking study for entry-level professional qualifications, such as those with the Chartered Institute for Securities and Investment, the CFA Institute or the Chartered Insurance Institute. It can take several years to become highly enough qualified to find employment as an investment analyst.

Some companies do offer apprenticeships for school leavers, which could lead to a career as an investment analyst. 

Graduates will need a degree of 2.1 or higher. Qualifications in business studies, management, statistics, mathematics, accounting or economics can be particularly helpful, as can an MBA or similar professional qualification. Relevant paid or voluntary experience gained via internships can be beneficial. Language skills may also be useful when working for an employer with international clients.

Key skills for investment analysts
Research skills
Confidence
Determination
Self-motivation
An interest in current affairs
Ability to work effectively under pressure
IT skills
Analytical and problem-solving skills
Teamworking skills
Numerical skills
Communication skills.