Information technology consultants advise on, plan, design and install information technology systems for their clients.

IT consultants, also known as technology consultants, are contracted to work with industrial and commercial clients who are seeking help and advice about business and IT problems.

A typical project involves:

consulting staff from different parts of a client's organisation
analysing an organisation’s data
determining information system requirements and defining project objectives
making recommendations, such as suggesting appropriate hardware, software and systems
designing, installing and trialling new systems and software, and fixing any issues that arise
compiling and presenting information
writing reports and documentation
repairing computer problems and removing viruses
training users
responding to feedback.
A flexible attitude to working patterns is helpful as travel and periods of working away from home are to be expected.

Typical employers of IT consultants
Specialist IT consultancies
Software companies
Utility companies
IT retailers
Financial organisations
Other large private organisations
Professional services firms
IT consultants with several years’ experience may also do freelance work.

Vacancies are advertised online – by employers and on IT jobs boards such as IT Jobs Watch – as well as by recruitment agencies, careers services and by TARGETjobs.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
Both graduates and school leavers can become IT consultants, though most junior roles are advertised at graduates. Any degree is acceptable for entry into the profession, but some employers require a relevant subject such as computer science, software engineering, electronic engineering, IT, business studies or maths.Any previous experience gained through summer internships and industrial placements is beneficial.

Read more about IT consultancy as a graduate area of work here.
There are a few apprenticeships on offer in IT consultancy. These are usually offered by the larger technology and outsourcing companies and professional services firms. 

Key skills for IT consultants
Meticulous approach to work
Attention to detail
Capable of meeting high standards
Good problem-solving skills
Analytical and technical skills
Effective time management skills to meet deadlines
The ability to work under pressure
The ability to multi-task
Interpersonal and communication skills when dealing with clients