Laboratory technicians support laboratory-based scientific investigations by undertaking a range of routine technical tasks and experiments.

Laboratory technicians are the backbone of a scientific research lab. Their work is almost entirely laboratory-based and technicians may work alone or as part of a team of scientific staff. They can work in most areas of science including forensics, health and manufacturing.

The area a laboratory technician works in will largely dictate the work they do. If they’re in a medical environment, they might be analysing body fluids or tissues, conducting blood tests and examining cells. If they work for a food and drink manufacturer, they might be testing food and drink samples to detect contamination or ensure quality.

Typical responsibilities of a lab technician include:

conducting and supporting scientific investigations and experiments
planning, setting up and undertaking controlled experiments and trials
recording and analysing data
demonstrating procedures
collecting, preparing and/or testing samples
maintaining, calibrating, cleaning and testing sterility of the equipment
providing technical support
presenting results to senior staff
writing reports, reviews and summaries
keeping up to date with relevant scientific and technical developments
supervising staff
carrying out risk assessments
ordering and maintaining stock and resources
Typical employers of laboratory technicians
Environmental agencies
Specialist research organisations or consultancies
Universities
Hospitals and clinics
The Civil Service
Water companies
Pharmaceutical companies
Chemical companies
Food and drink companies
Early applications are recommended for opportunities with major employers. Vacancies are advertised by recruitment agencies and careers services, in newspapers, in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist, Science, Nature and Laboratory News and their online equivalents and in journals published by the professional institutions.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
Both university graduates and school leavers can become lab technicians. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant scientific subject such as biology, biochemistry, chemistry or physics. They will typically start off as a laboratory technician and work their way up to a more senior research and development role.

A school leaver can apply for an apprenticeship or an entry-level role. Typically, you’ll need GCSEs or Standard Grades and you might also need A levels or Scottish Highers, including a scientific subject. With experience, a school leaver could progress to a supervisor role in the lab. To move into a research role, however, you would need to get a degree.

Key skills for laboratory technicians
Independence
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent written and oral communication skills
Good teamworking skills
Analytical skills
Time management