Landscape architects are responsible for creating natural and built environments that are aesthetically pleasing as well as practical, in both urban and rural areas.

Landscape architects and designers advise on, plan, design and oversee the creation, regeneration and development of external land areas such as gardens and recreational areas, as well as residential, industrial and commercial sites. Essentially, they combine artistic skills with knowledge of human activity and the natural environment – and can help to protect and conserve the environment.

Their work includes:

creating plans, designs and drawings using computer-aided design programs
surveying sites
advising on matters to do with environmental conservation
discussing requirements with clients
writing reports
producing contracts and estimated costs
presenting proposals to clients for approval and agreeing time-scales
overseeing projects as they progress
seeking the opinions of locals, business and others who use the site
liaising with other professionals such as architects, surveyors, town planners and civil engineers
Landscape contractors normally undertake actual construction or maintenance work, with landscape architects or landscape designers retaining responsibility for the designs, overseeing the project and monitoring progress. Landscape architects normally work in an office and travel to sites as needed.

Within landscape architecture, it is possible to specialise in design, management, science, planning or urban design. Some will develop more scientific expertise in areas such as trees, water mammals or soil, for example.

Read up on the salaries of landscape architects in our construction salary guide.

Typical employers for landscape architects
Landscape practices
Construction and engineering consultancies
House-building companies
Local authorities
Vacancies are typically advertised online via Landscape Institute and in a variety of publications including local authority jobs lists, national newspapers, Architects' Journal and Building Design as well as their respective websites. There are vacancies posted on TARGETjobs from time to time, but you may well need to network or apply speculatively for vacancies. The Landscape Institute Directory of Registered Practices (also available via the Landscape Institute website) can provide useful contact information for networking and speculative applications.

Qualifications and training required
You can only become a landscape architect if you have a relevant degree accredited by the Landscape Institute (LI), which usually takes the form of a three-year undergraduate degree plus a one-year postgraduate diploma in landscape architecture. However, if your undergraduate degree is in a subject such as art, geography, or horticulture you can do a postgraduate ‘conversion’ masters lasting up to two years.

Once you are employed and have a year or two’s experience, you can work towards gaining chartership, a professional qualification, with the LI. Most employers will expect you to do this and support you while doing so.

Most landscape architecture students secure work experience or internships through applying speculatively to private landscape practices – find out how to do this.

Key skills for landscape architects
Artistic flair
An interest in the environment, life sciences and knowledge of the conditions needed for wildlife to flourish
Creativity and imagination
Good verbal and written communication
Negotiation and leadership ability
An eye for detail
Lateral and spatial thinking
Drawing and IT skills, including the ability to use computer-aided design
Client management skills