Barrister’s clerks undertake the day-to-day business administration and running of a barrister’s chambers.

Barristers’ clerks work as administrators within barrister chambers. They keep chamber diaries up-to-date, calculate and negotiate fees for the work carried out and ensure every member is informed of their commitments.

Typical duties include:

negotiating and agreeing fees for cases
appropriately allocating cases to barristers, taking into account experience, availability, skills and specialisms
planning barristers’ workloads
negotiating and agreeing a timetable of required work
managing financial accounts
organising case fees collection
checking computerised diaries and court listings to avoid clashes in commitments
undertaking relevant research
carrying out administrative and business management activities
seeking work and marketing the chambers via events and seminars
keeping up-to-date with legal developments, particularly in specialist areas
liaising with solicitors and the Crown Prosecution Service
providing the client’s solicitor with information about progress or possible delays in cases
organising meetings between clients, barristers and instructing solicitors
By virtue of barristers’ busy schedules, the work of a barristers’ clerk can be demanding with long hours, heavy workloads and tight deadlines to match.

Vacancies can be found at the Institute of Barristers’ Clerks website, among others, and in local newspapers and publications.

Directories such as the TARGETjobs Pupillages Handbook and other professional publication provide useful contact information for networking and speculative applications.

Typical employers of barristers’ clerks
Barristers’ clerks work for barristers’ chambers, found mostly in London and other major cities, or practices clustered near regional law courts.

Qualifications and training required
Formal academic qualifications are not required for entry into the profession, although a degree in law may be advantageous.

Previous experience gained in a legal, business or court administration position is advantageous. Many chambers run work experience schemes that are usually heavily subscribed.

Once you have found a position, you can apply for membership with the Institute of Barristers’ Clerks, which awards networking and support benefits as well as access to discounted training seminars.

Barristers’ clerks usually start in a junior position, progressing in time to senior clerks, at which point they can expect a higher salary and greater responsibility within the chambers.

Key skills for barristers’ clerks
Excellent interpersonal and communication skills, both oral and written
Excellent organisational skills combined with good time and people management skills
A professional manner
Self-confidence, motivation and determination 
Good IT skills
Ability to handle high pressure, long hours and demanding deadlines