Learning mentors provide support and guidance to help school pupils who are experiencing difficulties in learning due to social, emotional or behavioural problems.

Learning mentors work on a group or one-to-one basis with children of all ages.

Typical responsibilities include:

working with school staff to select pupils for mentoring
discussing the aims of mentoring with pupils
supporting under-performing pupils inside and outside of the classroom
agreeing and writing action plans
making home visits to talk to parents about issues and to offer advice about strategies to deal with problems
liaising with schools, teachers, social workers and educational psychologists and making referrals where appropriate
organising and running drop-in sessions and music and sports events for pupils
aiding pupils with the transition to secondary education
helping pupils to increase their confidence and self-esteem by listening to them and devising appropriate strategies
Typical employers of learning mentors
Learning mentors work for primary schools, secondary schools, academies and colleges.

Prior mentoring experience is essential, as is experience gained working with young people. Voluntary mentoring schemes are organised by many universities and some local authorities. Paid job vacancies are advertised in newspapers, online and in local authority jobs bulletins.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes to becoming a learning mentor for both graduates and school leavers.

It can be helpful to have a degree or higher national diploma (HND) in psychology or social science, or a national curriculum subject – particularly English or maths. Candidates will need Disclosure and Barring Service clearance in order to work with children. Alternatively, you may be able to enter a career in this area through volunteering and gaining relevant experience.

Key skills for learning mentors
Maturity
Interpersonal skills
Listening skills
Organisational skills
Problem solving skills
Communication skills
Assertiveness
Resilience
A non-prejudicial manner