Leisure centre managers are responsible for every aspect of the day-to-day management of centres dedicated to sports, leisure, health and fitness.

Specific duties and the amount of customer or staff contact vary according to the size of employer: managers in larger organisations may be mostly office based, whereas those employed by smaller establishments often have frequent contact with customers, suppliers and employees.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

recruiting, training and supervising staff
managing budgets
organising fitness activities or programmes
maintaining statistical and financial records
developing new facilities
promoting and marketing the business
ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation
maintaining customer service standards
dealing with enquiries, complaints and emergencies.
Promotional opportunities are generally best for employees who are willing or able to change employment sector or job location.

Typical employers for leisure centre managers
Local authorities
Commercial organisations
Hotel and leisure groups
Educational institutions
Company fitness centres
Vacancies attract strong competition. Opportunities are advertised online and in local, regional and national newspapers, specialist publications including Leisure Management, Leisure Opportunities, Leisure Week and vacancy lists produced by the Chartered Institute for the Management of Sport and Physical Activity (CIMSPA). Several specialist recruitment agencies also advertise opportunities.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both university graduates and school leavers.

Employers often prefer graduates with relevant qualifications in subjects such as management, sports science, recreation, health management, physiotherapy, business or leisure studies. A postgraduate qualification can be useful for graduates without appropriate degrees.

It is essential to possess relevant experience, possibly gained via part-time or seasonal work, or by working as a fitness instructor, leisure centre attendant or recreation assistant.

Key skills for leisure centre managers
Commercial awareness
Physical fitness (or at least an interest in fitness and sport)
Excellent problem solving skills
Customer service skills
Organisational skills
Interpersonal skills
Teamwork and leadership skills
Verbal communication skills
Administrative and cash management skills