Licensed conveyancers are specialist property lawyers who undertake the legal administration of residential and commercial property sales, purchases and transfers 

Licensed conveyancers work solely within property law. In England and Wales, they can do everything that a solicitor can do in a conveyancing transaction – they have the same legal authority to act. In Scotland, conveyancing is done by solicitors only.

Typical responsibilities include:

giving legal advice
researching cases
writing and preparing legal and financial documents
handling probate and litigation tasks
monitoring sales progress
handling and preparing contracts and leases
liaising with solicitors and estate agents
The profession offers good opportunities for promotion, although salaries (particularly during training) are lower than in other legal areas. The Council for Licensed Conveyancers (CLC) is the regulatory body for this profession.

Typical employers of licensed conveyancers
Solicitors' firms
Banks
Building societies
Property developers
Local authorities
The majority of licensed conveyancers work on a self-employed basis or in private practice. A large proportion of their work involves liaison with clients and organisations such as mortgage companies and estate agents.

Vacancies are advertised by specialist recruitment agencies, in national newspapers and relevant publications including the Chartered Institute of Legal Executives (CILEx) Journal , and the Law Society Gazette Jobs.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into becoming a licensed conveyancer for both university graduates and school leavers. School leavers need to complete the Level 4 Diploma in Conveyancing Law and Practice followed by completing the Level 6 Diploma in Conveyancing Law and Practice. 

For graduates, a degree in planning, surveying, law, management, finance or business studies can be advantageous.

To become a fully qualified licensed conveyancer it is necessary to complete one year of practical experience with an ‘authorised person’ such as a solicitor, and pass the Council for Licensed Conveyancers (CLC) exams.

Key skills for licensed conveyancers
Verbal communication and telephone skills
Teamwork skills
Ability to work under pressure
Ability to meet deadlines
Commitment and determination
Research skills
Attention to detail
Independence