Magazine features editors are responsible for overseeing the content and quality of magazine publications and for ensuring that features are topical, interesting and informative.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

selecting articles for issues and planning publication contents
generating ideas for articles and features
organising meetings with writers and designers to discuss and plan the features section of the magazine
commissioning features and stories from in-house writers or freelancers
supervising staff, including freelance writers, and setting deadlines
reading, writing and researching features and articles
rewriting, editing, proofreading and subbing copy to ensure it is ready to go to press
attending relevant events, fairs and conferences
ensuring that all feature articles comply with ethical codes of practice and legal guidelines.
Typical employers of features editors
Major commercial publishers (such as IPC Media or EMAP)
Smaller specialist publishers
Online and digital media publishers
Consumer magazines
‘In-house’ magazines for corporate customers
Customer ‘loyalty’ publications
Newspaper supplements
Business to business magazines
Vacancies are advertised via the internet, within the recruiting publication, in national newspapers, Press Gazette, Campaign, Broadcast and their respective websites. Speculative applications are advisable because some jobs are not advertised. Using contacts within the industry can be a good way to find out about opportunities. Directories such as Willings Press Guide and Benn's Media may be useful for direct approaches to employers. A few employers operate graduate trainee schemes.

Qualifications and training required
Although you do not technically need a degree to become a features editor, entry into the profession without a degree is now unusual.

The role is not available to entry-level candidates, so previous experience and training is usually essential. Recent graduates typically enter in the role of editorial assistant. An English or Media Studies degree or a qualification accredited by the National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ) may be advantageous. The NCTJ offers a qualification in magazine journalism that covers many of the fundamental skills required for the position. Working on a student magazine can often provide a good introduction to magazine journalism. Specialist knowledge or a scientific or technical background may be required for some vacancies. Prior relevant experience is essential.

Key skills for features editors
Good general and current affairs knowledge
Excellent oral and written communication skills
Interpersonal skills
IT skills
Creativity
Confidence
Organisational skills
Determination and resilience