Maintenance engineers undertake scheduled and breakdown maintenance of engineering equipment or plants.

Maintenance engineers ensure that industrial machinery and equipment runs smoothly and reliably.

Their work typically involves:

planning and undertaking scheduled maintenance
responding to breakdowns
diagnosing faults
repairing equipment
supervising engineering and technical staff
obtaining specialist components, fixtures or fittings
managing budgets
maintaining statistical and financial records
ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation
creating maintenance procedures
managing stocks of supplies and equipment.
Shift and 'on-call' work may be required, particularly where manufacturing equipment is in continual 24-hour operation. Career progression is often accelerated; maintenance engineers have opportunities to move into managerial positions or related areas of employment such as plant/production engineering.

Typical employers of maintenance engineers
Manufacturing, construction and process companies (for example food and drink manufacturers)
Utilities companies
Local authorities
Government agencies
The armed forces
Research facilities
Consultancies
Self-employment via contract work, and occasionally consultancy, is possible for individuals with several years' experience.

Jobs are advertised online, by careers services, by recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in relevant publications including TARGETjobs Engineering, The Engineer and their respective websites.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both school leavers and university graduates. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant engineering discipline such as mechanical, manufacturing, electrical or electronic engineering. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

Many employers offer final-year project work, sponsorship, vacation work and sandwich year placements. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

School leavers can enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) or an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as manufacturing or mechanical engineering. 

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for maintenance engineers
An ability to work well under pressure
Good verbal and written communication skills
Relevant technical knowledge
Problem-solving skills
Efficiency and organisation
Teamworking skills