Mechanical engineers produce specifications for, design, develop, manufacture and install new or modified mechanical components or systems.

Mechanical engineers can work on components and equipment for many industries including healthcare, power, transport and water.

Job responsibilities vary greatly according to the size and type of employer. However, duties typically include:

assessing project requirements
measuring the performance of mechanical components, devices and engines
agreeing budgets, timescales and specifications with clients and managers
maintaining and modifying equipment to ensure that it is safe, reliable and efficient
using computer-aided design/modelling software
liaising with suppliers
undertaking relevant research
producing and implementing designs and test procedures
presenting designs to managers and clients
testing, evaluating, modifying and re-testing products
writing reports and documentation
providing technical advice
analysing and interpreting data.
Typical employers of mechanical engineers
Engineering, transport, manufacturing, construction and process companies
Research and development organisations
Consultancies
Utilities companies
The Civil Service
The armed forces
Government agencies
Self-employment via consultancy and contract work is possible for individuals with several years' experience.

Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in relevant publications including TARGETjobs Engineering, Automotive Engineer, Computer Weekly, The Engineer, Engineering, Engineering News and their respective websites.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both school leavers and university graduates. Graduates need a degree in a relevant subject such as mechanical, automotive or aeronautical or manufacturing engineering. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

If you are a school leaver, you may be able to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) in a relevant subject such as mechanical engineering. If you are aiming for a technician role, you can achieve this with an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as manufacturing or mechanical engineering. 

Relevant work experience is useful: many employers offer final-year project work, degree sponsorship, vacation work and industrial placements which can provide valuable experience and a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for mechanical engineers
Effective technical skills
The ability to work under pressure
Problem-solving skills
Creativity
Interpersonal skills
Verbal and written communication skills
Commercial awareness
Teamworking skills.