Medical physicists use analytical and applied scientific techniques to assist healthcare workers in the safe diagnosis and treatment of patients.

Medical physicists use a variety of analytical, computer-aided and bioengineering techniques in their work such as radiotherapy, x-ray imaging, ultrasound, tomography, radiology, nuclear magnetic resonance imaging and lasers.

They work with patients and with a wide range of medical, technical and administrative staff.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

researching, developing and evaluating new analytical techniques
planning and ensuring safe and accurate treatment of patients
providing advice about radiation protection
training and updating healthcare, scientific and technical staff
managing radiotherapy quality assurance programmes
mathematical modelling
maintaining equipment
writing reports
teaching
laboratory management
Typical employers of medical physicists
Hospitals
Universities
Research organisations
Diagnostic or medical instrumentation manufacturers
There are good prospects for promotion within the public sector as the NHS operates a structured career path and salary scale.

Vacancies are advertised by the Institute of Physics and Engineering, in Medicine's Placement Service Circular, in national newspapers and scientific journals such as New Scientist, plus their respective websites.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
To become a medical physicist a good degree in physics, applied science, computation, mathematics or engineering is necessary. However, for positions with the NHS, each NHS trust decides which degrees are relevant. A postgraduate qualification can be beneficial. Read our article on scientific postgraduate study to explore your different options and visit the science section of TARGETpostgrad for lots more advice.

Research work, hospital laboratory placements and/or relevant experience gained using similar scientific and analytical techniques can also be useful.

To work within the NHS, you will need to complete the scientist training programme (STP) after your degree. The application process for the STP typically starts in January.

Scotland has separate training schemes, which also involve a three year STP or an equivalent programme.

After completing the STP, you can then apply for a certificate of attainment from the Academy of Healthcare Science. This is will enable you to apply for registration with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

In order to practice as a clinical scientist in the UK, you must be registered with the HCPC. You will automatically be eligible to apply for registration if you have completed an HCPC approved course, but you will need to pay a fee for the HCPC to process your application, plus a registration fee, which is reduced by 50% if you graduated from an approved course within the last two years.

Professional training on the job is normally provided for successful candidates. Membership of the Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine may be beneficial.

Key skills for medical physicists
A logical and inquisitive mind
Excellent IT skills
Analytical skills
Good team working abilities