Meteorologists use a variety of scientific techniques to understand, interpret, observe and predict the earth's atmosphere and its phenomena.

Meteorologists study the earth’s atmosphere – particularly climate and weather – in order to forecast weather conditions.

The main duties of meteorologists include:

recording and analysing data from worldwide weather stations, satellites, radars and remote sensors
interpreting observations from the land, sea and upper atmosphere
providing customers (such as civil aviation companies, broadcast companies and military units) with weather reports/forecasts
employing mathematical and physical formulae and using computer modelling applications to help make long and short range weather predictions
researching and predicting climate change
helping to improve weather prediction models
writing research papers, reports, reviews and summaries
keeping up to date with relevant scientific and technical developments
Typical employers of meteorologists
The Met Office
BBC
Environmental consultancies
Natural Environmental Research Council (NERC)
Research centres
British Antarctic Survey
The armed forces
Vacancies are advertised via the internet, by careers services, in national newspapers and in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist, Science and Nature. Speculative applications are recommended, since roles aren’t always heavily advertised.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
You can only become a meteorologist if you have a good degree (a 2.1 or higher) in an appropriate subject such as meteorology, mathematics, physical sciences, computer science or environmental science. A relevant postgraduate qualification (a PhD or research-based MSc) is also beneficial, and may be necessary for research positions. A range of degrees are accredited by the Royal Meteorological Society.

Practical work experience can be beneficial: the Met Office provides a few industrial placements and summer placements each year, although these attract competition.

Key skills for meteorologists
Analytical skills
Genuine interest in weather systems
Teamworking skills
Interpersonal skills
Written and oral communication skills
Problem solving skills
Computer literacy
Mathematical abilities