Microbiologists use a wide range of analytical and scientific techniques to monitor and study microbes such as algae, bacteria, fungi and viruses.

Microbiologists undertake laboratory analysis and monitoring of microbial cultures, samples and new drugs using specialist computer software and a range of identification methods and clinical trials.

Responsibilities include:

planning and carrying out trials
tracking environmental microorganism development
growing microbe cultures
developing new pharmaceutical products, vaccines, medicines and compounds such as antiseptics
collecting samples from a variety of locations
recording, analysing and interpreting data
writing research papers, reports and reviews
keeping up to date with scientific and research developments
ensuring that data is recorded accurately in accordance to guidelines
observing high health and safety standards
inspecting food and drink manufacturing processes to check for possible contamination
managing laboratories
Typical employers of microbiologists
The Food Standards Agency
Water and waste management companies
Public and private sector organisations
Government agencies
Public Health England
Research institutions
Hospitals
Public health and private laboratories
Pharmaceutical, biochemical and biotechnology companies
Universities
Food and drink manufacturers
Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services, by specialist recruitment agencies, in newspapers, in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist, Science, Nature, in journals published by the professional institutions and on their respective websites.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
You can only become a microbiologist if you have a relevant degree in a subject such as biology, applied biology, microbial science, microbiology, or biological or biomedical science.

Some employers may require a relevant postgraduate qualification. It is possible to do an integrated masters degree, such as an MBiolSci, an MBiol or an MSc. These are designed to lead to further postgraduate study (eg a PhD), and are particularly suited to those looking for a career in research. Read our article on scientific postgraduate study to explore your different options and visit the science section of TARGETpostgrad for lots more advice.

To work within the NHS, you will need to complete the scientist training programme (STP) after your degree. The application process for the STP typically starts in January.

Scotland has separate training schemes, which also involve a three year STP or an equivalent programme.

After completing the STP, you can then apply for a certificate of attainment from the Academy of Healthcare Science. This will enable you to apply for registration with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).

In order to practice as a clinical scientist in the UK, you must be registered with the HCPC. You will automatically be eligible to apply for registration if you have completed an HCPC approved course, but you will need to pay a fee for the HCPC to process your application, plus a registration fee, which is reduced by 50% if you graduated from an approved course within the last two years.

Paid or voluntary research and lab work experience is helpful. Some pharmaceutical companies offer paid summer placements, many of which are listed by the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI). The Microbiology Society and the Society for Applied Microbiology also both offer a variety of grants to support students who want to gain some work experience.

Key skills for microbiologists
Patience
Attention to detail
Decisiveness
Independence
Excellent IT skills
Numerical skills
Analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Communication skills