Mining engineers assess the feasibility, safety and productivity of mine locations and plan, manage and optimise the extraction of surface and underground deposits.

Mining engineers ensure that underground resources such as minerals, metals, oil and gas are extracted safely and efficiently. Typical job responsibilities include:

assessing the feasibility and the potential for commercial benefit of new sites
ascertaining extraction risks
producing models or plans for possible mining sites
planning and implementing extraction systems
using specialist computer applications to maximise planning and production
monitoring and evaluating underground performance
managing construction projects
ensuring that operations comply with health and safety requirements
making sure that the equipment used is safe
managing budgets
training and supervising staff
liaising with and advising managerial and technical staff
analysing data
keeping records
costing and organising supplies.
Typical employers of mining engineers
Mining companies
Quarrying companies
Extraction companies
Environmental consultancies
Large construction and manufacturing companies
Mining consultancies
Mining engineering is an international profession, with many jobs based overseas.

Jobs are advertised online, by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies and in publications such as TARGETjobs Engineering, Mining Journal and InfoMine, plus their respective websites. Speculative applications made early during the first term of your final year are essential. The Directory of Mines and Quarries may prove useful for contact information. You can also find tips for finding and applying for jobs with smaller engineering companies here.

For help with applying for engineering jobs, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
To become a mining engineer, you will need a degree in a relevant subject such as mining engineering, civil engineering or geology. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees

A postgraduate qualification can be beneficial and may be necessary for some posts. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate options to explore your options.

Relevant experience gained via placements or by working in junior positions is extremely beneficial. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships. Most mining engineering degree courses offer periods of practical mining experience – these can provide a useful source of contacts for employment following the completion of academic studies.

Different countries have varying requirements for entry into the profession in terms of experience and academic qualifications, so it is important to research the requirements and gain a qualification that will be accepted.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree with honours in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for mining engineers
Confidence
Problem-solving and analytical skills
Organisation and efficiency
Independence
Strong technical skills
Teamworking skills
Managerial and interpersonal skills
IT skills.