Nanoscience is a relatively new branch of the physical sciences and is ideal for scientists who want to focus in on the small details. Nanoscientists often specialise in the industrial or engineering fields, pure research or medical nanotechnology.

Nanoscience is the study of the infinitely small – the atoms and sub-atomic particles that make up all matter in the universe. To give you an idea of the scales nanoscientists work with, there are a billion nanometres in a metre, so that’s ten million nanometres in a centimetre and a million nanometres in a millimetre. Nanoscientists study and seek to exploit the properties of substances on this scale to create new types of materials and make extraordinary advances in areas including biology, chemistry, materials science and physics. Possible developments could be a mobile phone that never needs to be charged or materials that can withstand a rocket’s re-entry into the earth's atmosphere.

The job typically involves conducting research, completing laboratory experiments and tests, and writing up reports, but a nanoscientist’s specific tasks will depend on the industry they’re working in.

In medicine, a nanoscientist might:

conduct experiments such as making tissue repairs at cellular level
experiment with using nano-sized particles, devices and, perhaps one day, robots to repair the human body
In the food sector, a nanoscientist might:

use nanotechnology to identify any potential diseases or other contaminants in products
conduct research to find ways to use nanotechnology to keep food fresher for longer
In engineering, a nanoscientist might:

conduct research to design ever-smaller components or microchips with greater electrical resistance or conductivity to improve performance
develop nanofibers to create lightweight, super strong materials for a range of uses
develop minute sensors that can remotely detect traces of dangerous chemicals or radiation
Typical employers of nanoscientists
Universities and research institutes
Electronics and semiconductor manufacturers
Aviation and aerospace engineering companies
Hospitals
Medical device manufacturers
Pharmaceutical companies
The defence sector
Food and drink manufacturers
Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services, by specialist recruitment agencies, in newspapers, in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist and Science, journals published by the professional institutions, and their respective websites.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
For nanoscientists who want to work in applied or research jobs in industry, a bachelors degree is essential. Relevant degree subjects include maths, physics, chemistry, engineering, microbiology and materials science. A postgraduate qualification such as a masters or PhD may be necessary. There are several nanoscience and nanotechnology courses available. To become a medical nanoscientist you will need a PhD.

Relevant work experience in a laboratory environment can also be beneficial when applying for jobs.

Key skills for nanoscientists
A meticulous approach to work
Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills
Ability to interact and communicate effectively with a wide range of people
A systematic approach to tasks
Excellent IT skills
Good interpretative skills
Ability to work in teams
Good at maths