Naval architects work as part of a team responsible for designing, producing and repairing safe, sea-worthy surface or underwater vessels.

Naval architects can work with a range of vessels including ships, ferries, submarines and yachts.

Responsibilities of the job typically include:

assessing project requirements and researching feasibility
planning and supervising the construction of vessels
negotiating and agreeing project budgets, timescales and specifications with clients
producing detailed designs of ships, boats and other maritime vessels using drawings and specialist computer software
developing and utilising test procedures including computer modelling and scale models
interpreting and analysing data and test results
sourcing and purchasing components, equipment and materials
ensuring adherence to appropriate health and safety legislation/standards
identifying the need for, and supervising, vessel repairs
writing reports and documentation
giving presentations
undertaking relevant research
supervising junior staff
providing technical advice
answering queries from clients.
To find out more, read our marine industry sector overview, written by an experienced marine engineer.

Typical employers of naval architects
Government departments (particularly the Ministry of Defence)
Boat and ship builders/repairers
Companies that construct and repair smaller craft
Design consultants
Offshore constructors
Ship survey/regulatory societies
Companies that maintain/repair naval submarines and ships
Universities
Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in relevant publications including Offshore Engineer, Marine Engineers Review, The Engineer, Engineering, Professional Engineering, Engineering News and their respective websites.

Speculative applications are advisable; Lloyd’s Maritime Directory may be helpful for this.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
To become a naval architect, you will need a degree in a relevant subject such as naval architecture, marine or mechanical engineering, engineering design or civil or structural engineering. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

Specialist positions often require postgraduate qualifications. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate study to explore your options.

Relevant shipyard/design office work experience is desirable. Final-year project work, degree sponsorship, vacation work and industrial placements can provide a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

You can only gain professional status as a naval architect by becoming a member of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects (RINA) and registering with the Engineering Council. You can obtain engineering technician status (EngTech), incorporated engineer status (IEng) or chartered status (CEng).

Achieving chartered status can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MSc) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional institution such as RINA. You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for naval architects
Creativity
Effective technical skills
IT skills
Problem-solving skills
Leadership and interpersonal skills
Communication skills
Commercial awareness
Teamworking skills
Spatial awareness
A meticulous attention to detail.