Nutritionists help to advance an understanding of how diet affects the health and wellbeing of people and animals.

Nutritionists provide information on food and healthy eating and can work in a range of areas, including in public health, in the private sector and in education and research. Unlike dietitians who primarily work with people who are ill or whose health is affected by conditions such as food allergies, malnutrition or diabetes, nutritionists mostly work with people who are healthy. They may be involved in educating individuals or groups or in forming policy to shape nutritional advice. The amount of direct contact they have with members of the public depends on the precise nature of the role.

Key responsibilities of the job include:

researching how the body's functions are affected by nutrient supply
investigating the relationship between genes and nutrients
studying how diet affects metabolism
examining the process of nourishment and the association between diet, disease and health
providing health advice and promoting healthy eating
advising about special diets
educating health professionals and the public about nutrition
working as part of a multidisciplinary team/supporting the work of other health care professionals
Typical employers of nutritionists
National and local government (health and food departments)
Hospitals
Schools
Colleges
Universities
Food and animal feed manufacturers and retailers
Sports and exercise industry
Nutritionists work in many different non-clinical settings. Some are employed within the NHS, where they work alongside dietitians. A nutritionist cannot work with acutely ill patients in hospital unless supervised by a dietitian.

A small number of vacancies arise for appropriately qualified and experienced nutritionists to work for emergency relief and development projects overseas.

Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in specialist publications. The Nutrition Society also advertises vacancies on its website.

Qualifications and training required
There is no set entry route to becoming a nutritionist. However, in order to register with the professional association for nutritionists, the Association for Nutrition (AfN), it is necessary to have either substantial professional nutrition experience or an accredited undergraduate or postgraduate degree in nutrition science. The AfN lists accredited degrees on its website, and also certifies short courses that provide an introduction to nutrition science for those who are not ready to undertake a degree.

The undergraduate degree courses accredited by the AfN cover areas such as human nutrition, public health, nutrition and food science, nutrition and exercise and animal nutrition. You will usually need two or three A levels or equivalent, including biology, chemistry or mathematics, along with five GSCEs at grade A to C or equivalent, including English language, maths and science.

You will need a relevant first degree in order to apply for an accredited postgraduate qualification. These include masters qualifications in areas such as international nutrition, public health nutrition and sport and exercise nutrition. Requirements vary, but a medical or science degree, particularly in a biological science, is likely to be an advantage.

Key skills for nutritionists
Teamworking skills
Keen interest in the impact of diet on health
Good interpersonal skills
Communication skills, including the ability to explain complex things simply
An understanding of science
Able to motivate others
Business skills for freelance work