Occupational therapists help people overcome physical and mental problems that are the result of disability, injury, ageing or illness.

Occupational therapists work with adults and children with many different needs, from patients who need support adapting to life after major surgery to elderly people who need adaptations such as stairlifts in order to be able to stay in their own homes. They provide practical advice and solutions to enable people to live full, satisfying and independent lives. Specific duties vary depending on the field of work and whether occupational therapists (sometimes referred to as OTs) are based within hospital or community settings.

However, common responsibilities of the job include:

undertaking patient assessments of physical, communication, interaction and cognitive skills
planning and providing appropriate treatment and activities
giving advice and arranging support for family members, carers and clients
undertaking general administrative tasks, for example writing reports, making telephone calls, maintaining records and case notes
liaising with doctors, family members, carers and other professionals and keeping them updated
planning further treatment and reviewing progress
assessing treatment success at multi-professional case conferences/meetings
advising people on how they can approach everyday tasks differently
adapting people's environments, whether at home or at work
Typical employers of occupational therapists
NHS trusts
Local authority social services departments
Nursing and residential homes
Day care and health centres
GP practices
Prisons
Industrial organisations
Vacancies are advertised online, by recruitment agencies and careers services, in newspapers and publications including Occupational Therapy News, the British Journal of Occupational Therapy and their respective websites. You will also find vacancies on the NHS jobs website and on the websites of NHS trusts.

Qualifications and training required
You need to be registered with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) to practise as an occupational therapist, and in order to register, you need to complete an undergraduate or postgraduate occupational therapy degree approved by the HCPC. Approved degrees are listed on the HCPC website.

Undergraduate occupational therapy degrees take three or four years full time. You usually need two or three A levels or equivalent, along with five GSCEs at grades A to C including English language, maths or science. Postgraduate diploma or masters courses in occupational therapy usually take two years, and institutions typically require a relevant first degree and healthcare experience.

There are also some part-time courses you can take if you are working in a senior occupational therapy support role and your employer is willing to support you. Occupational therapy support workers work with occupational therapists and are also sometimes known as occupational therapy assistants. There are no set entry requirements for occupational therapy support worker roles.

Key skills for occupational therapists
Patience
Determination
Enthusiasm
Excellent interpersonal and communication skills
An interest in working closely with people
Good teamworking skills
Ability to find solutions to problems