Oceanographers employ mathematical, engineering and scientific theories to investigate the relationships between fresh water, seawater, the biosphere, atmosphere and polar ice caps.

Oceanographers can specialise in biological, physical, geological or chemical oceanography. They can study marine life, the ocean floor, chemicals in sea water, water temperature and density, tides and currents.

Typical responsibilities include:

planning, organising and leading field research trips
collecting field samples and data, probably at sea, using equipment such as remote sensors, marine robots and towed or self-powered underwater vehicles.
giving lectures and making presentations
using numerical/computer modelling to simulate ocean phenomena
testing samples in laboratory conditions
recording, analysing and interpreting data obtained from samples and remote sensing equipment
using numerical/statistical modelling to make predictions about trends
keeping up to date with scientific and research developments
attending relevant oceanography conferences, training courses and field trips
writing funding bids and research proposals
writing research papers, reports and reviews
analysing water samples for mineral content and life forms
using sophisticated equipment and specialist techniques to analyse samples
Oceanography can involve travel and periods of time away from home to conduct research.

Typical employers of oceanographers
Government departments and agencies such as the Environmental Agency
The Royal Navy
Environmental agencies
University research departments
Consultancies
Pressure groups
Most oceanographers are employed by the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) and its related bodies such as:

National Oceanography Centre
British Antarctic Survey
Opportunities are advertised online, in national newspapers, in relevant publications such as New Scientist, Earthworks, Journal of Geophysical Research and Nature and their respective websites. Directories such as The Society for Underwater Technology’s (SUT’s) corporate member list may also prove helpful.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
To become an oceanographer, you will usually need a degree in a relevant subject such as oceanography, marine sciences, geology, ecology, biology, chemical or physical sciences, computer science, software engineering, geophysics or technology, mathematics, environmental science or geography.

A relevant postgraduate qualification (a PhD or research-based MSc) is essential for many positions. SUT offers sponsorship awards to undergraduates and postgraduates pursuing a relevant degree. Read our article on scientific postgraduate study to explore your different options and visit the science section of TARGETpostgrad for lots more advice.

Postdoctoral research, practical research or marine laboratory work experience can be helpful. Computer and mathematical modelling experience is also advantageous, as are practical skills such as boat handling, scuba or sub aqua diving and first aid.

You may be able to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) or foundation degree. However, suitable posts will usually be support or technical positions, which are hard to come by.

Key skills for oceanographers
Patience
Determination
Creativity
Flexibility
Decisiveness
A logical and independent mind
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent IT skills
Analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Communication skills
Given the international community involved in many oceanography projects, possessing additional European languages could be useful. A willingness to work away from home, and at sea, can also be important. Working conditions can sometimes be dangerous and physically demanding.