Outdoor pursuits managers are responsible for every aspect of the day-to-day management of centres dedicated to providing instruction on a variety of outdoor activities including horse riding, mountaineering, cycling and water sports.

Typical responsibilities include:

recruiting, training and supervising a team of staff, including instructors
planning and organising appropriate outdoor activity programmes
handling booking enquiries
ensuring compliance with safety regulations
instructing groups in specialist areas
managing budgets
developing new activities
liaising with group managers, social workers and teachers
dealing with queries, complaints, accidents and emergencies
producing educational materials
promoting and marketing the business
maintaining customer service standards
attending training courses to keep qualifications up to date
recording and reporting accidents
buying, maintaining and checking the safety of facilities and equipment
writing and submitting funding bids
undertaking financial administration.
Typical employers of outdoor pursuits managers
Local authorities
Education authorities
Small private outdoor pursuits centres
Larger commercial organisations
Charitable organisations
Sports governing bodies
National sports centres
Opportunities are advertised online, in local, regional and national newspapers, in publications including Times Educational Supplement, Opportunities (which focuses on the public sector), Leisure Management, Leisure Jobs, Leisure Opportunities, their respective websites and vacancy lists produced by the Chartered Institute for the Management of Sport and Physical Activity (CIMSPA).

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a career in this area for both university graduates and school leavers.

A degree in any subject is acceptable, although employers may prefer graduates with qualifications in relevant subjects such as business management, sports science, physical education, recreation management, leisure studies, health management or tourism.

A postgraduate qualification in recreation management or outdoor education can be useful, particularly for graduates without relevant first degrees.

It is essential to possess experience in and knowledge of a minimum of one outdoor activity. It is also normally necessary to have a formal instructor's qualification in that activity and to have worked as an outdoor pursuits instructor.

Experience gained from seasonal activity holidays, expeditions, the Duke of Edinburgh's Award scheme or any other relevant activities is beneficial. Lifesaving and first aid qualifications can also be advantageous.

Key skills for outdoor pursuits managers
Physical fitness
Good state of health
Energy
Excellent leadership skills
Decision-making skills
Interpersonal skills
Verbal communication skills