Paramedics provide patients that have been involved in accidents, emergencies or other crises with specialist care and treatment.

A paramedic is usually the senior member of a two-person ambulance crew, supported by an emergency care assistant or technician. A paramedic is typically one of the first healthcare professionals to arrive at the scene of an emergency.

Typical duties of the job include:

driving and staffing ambulances and other emergency vehicles
responding to emergency 999 calls
assessing patients, providing emergency treatment and making diagnoses
monitoring and administering medication, pain relief and intravenous infusions
dressing wounds/injuries
using specialist equipment including ventilators and defibrillators
transporting patients to hospital and continuing to provide treatment while in transit
providing hospital staff with patient information including condition and treatment
helping provide patient care in hospitals and other medical facilities
communicating effectively with patients and their relatives/friends
teaching and training members of the public to use first aid techniques correctly
24-hour shift work (including weekends) is usually a standard requirement of the job.

Typical employers of paramedics
The NHS employs most paramedics, although there are also some vacancies with other organisations, including charities such as the St John Ambulance.

Jobs are advertised on the NHS jobs website, via ambulance service trusts and on the Paramedic Resource Centre's job listing page. The website of the College of Paramedics also lists vacancies.

Qualifications and training required
You need to be registered with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) to work as a paramedic. You need to have a qualification in paramedic science approved by the HCPC in order to register. The HCPC lists approved qualifications on its website.

There are different routes to qualifying as a paramedic. You can take a job as a student paramedic and study while you work. Alternatively, you can take an approved qualification in paramedic science and then apply to ambulance services. Ambulance trusts set their own criteria for student paramedic programmes, and entry is likely to be competitive. Another possible route is to apply for a degree apprenticeship in paramedic science. You can search for degree apprenticeship positions on the NHS jobs website, or use the government's apprenticeship search page.

Qualifications approved by the HCPC include full-time degrees, diplomas of higher education and foundation degree programmes in paramedic science and paramedic practice. You are likely to need at least two A levels or equivalent qualifications at level 3, plus supporting GCSEs or equivalent. You may also need a full manual driving licence.

Key skills for paramedics
A caring and outgoing personality
Good communication skills
The ability to make swift decisions and stay calm
A good level of physical fitness
Good navigational skills and driving skills
Resilience
Stamina