Pension scheme managers coordinate the effective operation of company/employer and insurance company managed pensions schemes.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

liaising with employees
working closely with human resources staff
recruiting, training and/or supervising a pensions administration team
developing pension policies and new pension schemes
making sure that pension schemes are effective and meet agreed quality, performance and customer care standards
resolving complex or controversial individual pensions claims
producing marketing material
making recommendations to clients and board directors
improving schemes in response to feedback from members
attending meetings with fund managers, actuaries, solicitors and consultants
ensuring compliance with current statutory legislation and regulations
writing annual/financial reports
managing IT-based pension administration systems.
Typical employers of pension scheme managers
Large companies that manage their own pension schemes
Public sector pension providers
Life assurance firms
Consultancies
Opportunities attract moderate competition. Vacancies are advertised in local and national newspapers including the Financial Times, and in a number of specialist publications such as Pensions Age, Pensions World and their respective websites.

Qualifications and training required
This career is open to both university graduates and school leavers. If you want to enter directly at trainee pensions manager level, you will find that some employers prefer graduates with degrees in business, finance or law, while others ask only for A levels/Scottish Highers/ HND. As a school leaver you can also start at administration level and work up by gaining experience and qualifications with a professional body such as the Chartered Insurance Institute (CII) or the Pensions Management Institute (PMI). There are several apprenticeships available at administrator level; see the government apprenticeship website for vacancies.

PMI offers an accredited professional qualification that pension scheme managers are required to complete once in employment. Previous relevant experience is not usually required, although some employers do offer summer vacation work experience placements.

Key skills for pension scheme managers
Excellent communication skills
Interpersonal skills
Organisational skills
Analytical skills
Leadership skills
Numerical skills
IT skills