Pharmacovigilance officers play a key role in the pharmaceutical industry and the development and testing of new medications. They ensure that drugs on the market are safe for patients and identify any problems.

A pharmacovigilance officer may also be called a drug safety officer. They are responsible for monitoring and reporting the effectiveness and any adverse effects or side effects of pharmaceutical products on the market in the general population and in hospitals and research trials. They must liaise closely with medical and drug company representatives, patients, doctors and other healthcare professionals to record the effectiveness of drugs and other treatments. The data is meticulously recorded, analysed and processed because the informed opinions of pharmacovigilance officers will help pharmaceutical companies maximise product safety and performance, and cut down on adverse effects.

Typical responsibilities include:

recording and reporting adverse reactions received from healthcare professionals and consumers
conducting in-depth interviews with patients and healthcare professionals
developing a thorough knowledge of products
completing periodic safety update reports on drugs and other treatments
writing and reviewing serious adverse effects reports and forms
flagging up early warning signs of adverse effects of drugs
minimising the risk of serious side effects
completing safety audits
working on clinical trials of new drugs
Typical employers of pharmacovigilance officers
Pharmaceutical companies
Medical device companies
Biotechnology companies
Regulatory authorities
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies, in national newspapers and in relevant scientific publications such as The Pharmaceutical Journal, New Scientist, Science and their respective websites.

Qualifications and training required
To become a pharmacovigilance officer, you will need a degree. Most employers will ask for a relevant life science or pharmacy degree. It’s also possible to get into this career as a qualified health professional, such as a nurse or pharmacist with relevant medical or nursing qualifications.

Key skills for pharmacists
Ability to keep meticulous records
Attention to detail
Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills
Ability to interact and communicate effectively with a wide range of people
A systematic approach to tasks
Excellent IT skills
Good interpretative skills
Team work
Good maths skills