Photographers use a variety of photographic equipment to capture moments of events, people, objects or scenes for records, art or commercial use.

Photographers tend to specialise in one particular area of photography such as press and photojournalism, fashion or scientific and medical photography. Their work typically entails:

setting up photographic equipment
taking pictures
editing and retouching images
choosing and setting up locations
reproducing and framing photographs
promoting business (especially if self-employed)
researching and making contacts
general administration.
The majority of their work is undertaken 'on location', so travel and irregular working hours are common features of the job.

Typical employers of photographers
Agencies
Picture libraries
Newspapers
Magazines
Catalogues
Advertising agencies
Hospitals
Medical publishers
Museums
Art galleries
Auctioneers
There are other specialist areas of work such as scientific, aerial and forensic photography.

Many jobs receive little advertising, and are filled via personal contacts so networking, job shadowing and speculative applications are essential – particularly for the most popular areas of work such as advertising, fashion, magazine and newspaper photography.

It is advisable to prepare a relevant portfolio, which can be used to highlight your abilities in speculative applications. Advertised vacancies appear in newspapers and specialist publications such as British Journal of Photography and its respective website.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into photography for both university graduates and school leavers.

Photography, film, art, design or media studies degrees can be advantageous – particularly for technical skills. Alternatively, there are many part-time photography courses, such as City & Guilds and Creative Skillset – the sector skills council for creative media, which can offer a useful starting point.

Key skills for photographers
Creativity
Technical photography skills
Patience and concentration
Attention to detail
Strong networking skills
Team working skills