Physiotherapists use a variety of techniques and therapies in the treatment and rehabilitation of patients who are affected by physical problems caused by illness, disability, injury or ageing.

Physiotherapists work with a variety of patients including physically disabled children, women before and after giving birth, athletes, patients who are in hospital or attending clinics and people within the community.

Tasks can include:

helping patients recover from accident, illness or injury
organising therapeutic physical exercise sessions
providing massages
using specialist techniques such as electrotherapy and ultrasound
collecting statistics
writing reports
liaising with professionals such as doctors and nurses
providing education and advice about exercise and movement
keeping up to date with the latest advancements in the profession
There are good opportunities for promotion: a structured career path exists within the NHS, and openings commonly occur within the private sector. Alternatively physiotherapists can specialise or move into teaching, research and managerial positions.

Typical employers of physiotherapists
Private/sports clinics
Hospitals
Nursing homes
Community centres
Charities
Industrial organisations
Special schools
Mental health and learning disability services
Local and professional sports clubs and centres
Relevant experience gained via voluntary work, placements or through employment as a physiotherapy support worker or assistant is very beneficial. Jobs are advertised on the websites of NHS trusts and on NHS Jobs, on the website of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy, and in national newspapers and specialist publications such as Frontline, Physiotherapy Journal and their respective websites.

Qualifications and training required
To qualify as a state registered physiotherapist you will need to take a physiotherapy degree approved by the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC). You will then need to register with the HCPC.

Full-time physiotherapy degrees typically take three years. There are also some two-year accelerated physiotherapy degrees suitable for those who already have a degree in a relevant subject, such as sports or life science.

To get onto a physiotherapy degree course you usually need two or three A levels, including a biological science and/or PE, along with five GSCE passes including English, maths and at least one science, or equivalent qualifications.

Key skills for physiotherapists
Good time management
The ability to build a rapport with patients from a variety of backgrounds and communicate with their relatives and carers
Tolerance and patience
Good physical health and fitness
Interpersonal skills
Teamworking skills