Picture researchers find suitable pictures for use in a wide range of media products including advertisements, books, magazines, newspapers, catalogues and television programmes.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

negotiating terms and conditions of contracts
establishing time-scales and budgets
determining project requirements
liaising closely with clients
undertaking relevant research
sourcing appropriate pictures and images for assigned projects
exploring all picture sources including online image banks and stock photo libraries
deciding when to use existing images or to commission a photographer
negotiating fair prices for pictures
handling images with care and protecting them from loss or damage
building computer archives of images
keeping accurate records of pictures
obtaining correct caption and credit information
using specialist software for editing and manipulating images
working with other professionals including writers, reporters, graphic designers and editors
keeping up to date with rules and regulations governing the use of images.
Typical employers of picture researchers
Publishing houses
Film companies
Television studios
Advertising companies
Design companies
Large companies, art galleries and museums also employ picture researchers. Many are self-employed/freelance and run their own business or work from home.

Vacancies attract intense competition but there are opportunities for permanent paid positions. Advertisements appear in national newspapers and publications including Design Week, Campaign, Creative Review, The Bookseller and their respective websites. Directories such as The Writers' and Artists' Year Book and Le Book can provide useful contact information for speculative applications.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both university graduates and school leavers.

Visual arts qualifications (fine art, photography, publishing, illustration or graphic design) may be helpful. Aptitude, relevant experience and artistic abilities are generally regarded as being equally important.

It is essential to have excellent picture knowledge and photographic experience. Relevant work experience is normally essential – this can be gained via speculative approaches to appropriate employers.

Key skills for picture researchers
Initiative
Strong research skills
Good language skills
Team working skills
Organisational skills
Negotiation skills
Problem solving skills
Communication skills
Presentation skills