Plant breeders (also known as geneticists) undertake scientific research into plant and crop-based agriculture with the aim of improving plant breeding techniques and developing new strains of crops.

Plant breeders improve existing plant varieties or create new ones to improve appearance, resistance to disease, yield and other characteristics. They may work in a commercial, academic or research setting.

Key responsibilities include:

setting research aims and objectives
producing project plans and budgets
researching new methods of plant breeding
undertaking laboratory, glasshouse and field trials
analysing and interpreting data
identifying the best varieties/species
selecting parent plants for cross-breeding
keeping records of your research and findings
presenting scientific findings and other work
making presentations
writing technical publications and reports
keeping up to date with current developments
liaising with other plant breeders
managing technical staff
Private sector jobs may come with benefits such as a company car, medical insurance and performance-linked pay. Opportunities for overseas work occur occasionally, although previous international experience may be required, and vacancies are often temporary.

Typical employers plant breeders
Commercial plant breeding companies
Specialist seed producers
Biotechnology and genetic engineering firms
International research institutes
Government research agencies
The Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC)
The Department for International Development
Jobs are advertised by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies, in local/national newspapers and publications including New Scientist, Nature, Farmers Weekly, Scottish Farmer, The Grower and their respective websites. Applications to jobs should be made as early as possible and speculative applications are advisable, for which information produced by the British Society of Plant Breeders may be useful.

Qualifications and training required
A degree in biological sciences, biotechnology, botany, genetics, agriculture, horticulture or crop or plant science is normally required. A relevant postgraduate qualification may also be necessary. 

Relevant agricultural/field trials/plant breeding work experience is particularly beneficial.

Entry with a higher national diploma (HND) is possible for those seeking technical support roles. However, further qualifications would be needed to progress to the role of plant breeder.

Key skills for plant breeders
Ability to work independently
Excellent research skills
Ability to manage a laboratory
Patience and resilience
Good communication skills
Technical skills
Analytical skills
A full driving licence may be required.