Production managers are responsible for the technical management, supervision and control of industrial production processes.

Production managers ensure that manufacturing processes run reliably and efficiently.

Responsibilities of the job include:

planning and organising production schedules
assessing project and resource requirements
estimating, negotiating and agreeing budgets and timescales with clients and managers
ensuring that health and safety regulations are met
determining quality control standards
overseeing production processes
re-negotiating timescales or schedules as necessary
selecting, ordering and purchasing materials
organising the repair and routine maintenance of production equipment
liaising with buyers and marketing and sales staff
supervising the work of junior staff
organising relevant training sessions
In larger companies, there may be close links between production management and general or strategic management and marketing or finance roles.

Typical employers of production managers
Food manufacturing and processing companies employ the majority of production managers.

Most graduates begin their career as a trainee or in a junior post such as a production supervisor, material planner or in inventory control. With appropriate experience, production managers may gain responsibility for several sites, possibly including production plants overseas.

Vacancies are advertised online at TARGETjobs, by careers services, in newspapers and in specialist publications such as Production Engineering Solutions, Food Manufacture and their respective websites. Specialist recruitment agencies may also advertise vacancies.

Qualifications and training required
It is possible to enter this profession with a degree or higher national diploma (HND) in any subject. However, depending on the industry you are trying to enter, some employers may require a sector-specific discipline such as business management, electrical, electronic, mechanical, process or production engineering, materials science or biochemistry.

If you are aiming for a more junior role, it is possible to enter the profession without a degree or HND. However, career progression may be limited. 

Membership with a professional body such as the Institute of Operations Management or the Chartered Management Institute may be beneficial. Both offer opportunities for continuing professional development (CPD), networking events and conferences.

Key skills for production managers
Confidence
Technical skills
Project management skills
Organisation and efficiency
Leadership and interpersonal skills
Problem solving skills
IT and numerical skills
Communication skills
Teamworking skills
Managers must also be able to handle responsibility and the pressure of meeting deadlines.