Project managers are responsible for the planning, management, coordination and financial control of a project.

Project managers ensure that a project is completed on time and within budget, that the project's objectives are met and that everyone else is doing their job properly. Projects are usually separate to usual day-to-day business activities and require a group of people to work together to achieve a set of specific objectives. Project managers oversee the project to ensure the desired result is achieved, the most efficient resources are used and the different interests involved are satisfied.

Typical responsibilities include:

agreeing project objectives
representing the client's or organisation's interests
providing advice on the management of projects
organising the various professional people working on a project
carrying out risk assessment
making sure that all the aims of the project are met
making sure the quality standards are met
using IT or other systems to keep track of people and progress
recruiting specialists and sub-contractors
monitoring sub-contractors to ensure guidelines are maintained
overseeing the accounting, costing and billing
reporting to the client or senior stakeholders on progress
evaluating the success of the project against its benchmarking and sharing lessons or best practice with other organisations or project managers.
Depending on the project, responsibilities can cover all aspects of a project from the beginning stages through to completion. Project managers typically lead by example, so expect to be working at least the same hours as your staff. Salaries for project management jobs can be high, but will vary according to the norms in the specific industry and the project manager’s level of experience.

Typical employers of project managers
A project management function, if not an actual job title, can be found in most organisations across virtually all industries. However, project management roles can be found most commonly in:

Technology companies
Construction and built environment companies
Architects
Retailers
Engineering companies
Manufacturers
Public sector organisations
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into the career for experienced professionals, graduates and school leavers alike.

Many project managers get appointed to the role after having worked in that particular industry for a significant period of time, as they have lots of related knowledge and skills to bring to the project.

However, many employers run project management graduate schemes, in which graduates start out as an ‘assistant project manager’ or a ‘graduate project manager’ in order to learn the ropes of project management. Whether you require a specific degree will vary according to the industry, employer and specific graduate scheme: for example, some engineering and technology organisations will require STEM subjects but many organisations will accept applications from all degree disciplines.

Similarly, a few organisations – particularly in the construction, engineering and manufacturing industries – offer higher or degree apprenticeships in project management. Entry requirements vary, but typically include a minimum of number of GCSEs (or equivalent) and a minimum number of UCAS points. Other organisations offer apprenticeships in various business-related roles (such as supply chain) that could eventually lead to a project management job.

Whatever stage in your career you become a project manager, you are likely to be required to pick up an industry qualification, such as those offered by the Association for Project Management (APM), the PRINCE2 or 'Agile' project management theory. It is also likely that you will need a full, clean driving licence.

Key skills for project managers
Organisational skills
Analytical skills
Well developed interpersonal skills
Numeracy skills
Commercial awareness
Communication skills
Teamworking skills
Diplomacy
Ability to motivate people
Management and leadership skills