Public relations officers use a wide range of media to build and sustain a good image for a company, organisation or brand through planned publicity campaigns and PR activity.

Public relations account executives are responsible for handling all aspects of planned publicity campaigns and PR activities.

Other tasks include:

planning publicity strategies and campaigns
writing and producing presentations and press releases
dealing with enquiries from the public, the press, and related organisations
organising and attending promotional events such as press conferences, open days, exhibitions, tours and visits
speaking publicly at interviews, press conferences and presentations
providing clients with information about new promotional opportunities and current PR campaigns progress
analysing media coverage
commissioning or undertaking relevant market research
liaising with clients, managerial and journalistic staff about budgets, timescales and objectives
Depending on the employer, PR officers may also be required to carry out other, more general, marketing responsibilities. This can involve working on websites and social media and writing and/or producing presentations, reports, articles, leaflets, journals and brochures for both external and internal distribution.

Typical employers of public relations officers
Advertising or marketing agencies
Consultancies
Commercial and industrial organisations
Private companies
Retailers
Manufacturers
Charities
Government organisations
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies and in national newspapers and trade publications including Press Gazette and PR Week. The Chartered Institute of Public Relations (CIPR) publishes lists of voluntary placements and salaried graduate training schemes.

Many graduates enter the profession at a junior level or move into PR following a marketing, journalism or advertising career. Networking and speculative applications can also be useful techniques for finding opportunities, for which a portfolio of written work may be useful for highlighting relevant abilities.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into PR for both university graduates and school leavers.

A degree in any subject is acceptable, although English, management, business or media studies, marketing or behavioural sciences may be preferred by some employers. A PR postgraduate qualification can also be helpful.

Work experience gained within the PR, marketing, fundraising, events promotion, or journalism trades may also be beneficial in your applications.

Key skills for public relations officers
Excellent communication skills both orally and in writing
Excellent interpersonal skills
Good IT skills
Presentation skills
Initiative
Ability to prioritise and plan effectively
Awareness of different media agendas
Creativity