Public librarians are responsible for acquiring, organising, managing and distributing library resources, and ensuring that library provision meets the needs of all its users. They are sometimes referred to as information professionals.

Typical duties include:

selecting, cataloguing and classifying library resources
answering enquiries
ensuring that library services meet the needs of particular groups of users (eg children, adult learners and schools)
making improvements to accessibility of library resources
maintaining statistical and financial records
using library systems and specialist computer applications
promoting and marketing services
developing IT facilities and assisting with the use of computer equipment
supporting independent research and learning.
The job normally involves regular evening and weekend work. Prospects for career advancement are good, particularly within larger libraries and for individuals who are willing to move jobs/geographical location.

Typical employers of public librarians
The British Library
Local authority libraries
Information services
Central government departments
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies, in local or national newspapers, by the Times Higher Education and by the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP) on their website Lisjobnet.Speculative and early applications for traineeships and postgraduate courses are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
To become a public librarian you will normally need an accredited degree, although it is possible to become a librarian through a vocational route or an apprenticeship.

To work professionally as a public librarian, you will need either a first degree which is accredited by the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP), or a degree in any subject followed by an accredited postgraduate qualification. While this degree can be in any subject, the following disciplines could prove particularly beneficial: librarianship; computer science; information science/management; or software engineering. The Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP) publishes an annual list of accredited undergraduate and postgraduate courses. The Arts and Humanities Research Council funds a limited number of course places.

It’s possible to become a librarian without a degree by following a work-based route. If you have more than two years’ work experience as a library assistant or with an information service, you could be eligible for CILIP certification. After successfully applying for CILIP certification, you would gain Certified Affiliate status (ACLIP). Following two more years of working, you would then be eligible for chartership, which leads to full qualification.

It may also be possible to enter the profession through an apprenticeship. Apprenticeships are advertised on the government website.

Key skills for public librarians
confidence
excellent organisational skills
team-working skills
strong IT skills
verbal communication skills
the ability to talk to people from all walks of life
All candidates should be familiar with the use of databases and the internet.