Restaurant managers are responsible for overseeing the efficient running and profitability of restaurants and for managing their employees.

Specific duties and the amount of customer/staff contact vary according to the size of employer: managers in larger organisations may be mostly office-based, whereas managers of smaller establishments often have frequent contact with both customers and employees.

Typical job responsibilities include:

recruiting, training and supervising staff
agreeing and managing budgets
planning menus
ensuring compliance with licensing, hygiene and health and safety legislation/guidelines
promoting and marketing the business
overseeing stock levels
ordering supplies
producing staff rotas
handling customer enquiries and complaints
taking reservations
greeting and advising customers
problem solving
preparing and presenting staffing/sales reports
keeping statistical and financial records
assessing and improving profitability
setting targets
handling administration and paperwork
liaising with customers, employees, suppliers, licensing authorities and sales representatives
making improvements to the running of the business and developing the restaurant.
Typical employers of restaurant managers
National, regional and international restaurant chains
Large hotel restaurants
Independent restaurants
Themed restaurants
Café bars
Brassieres
Hotel/leisure groups
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies and in local and national newspapers. More information can be found in publications such as The Caterer and British Hotelier and Restaurateur and on the Institute of Hospitality website. Networking and speculative approaches to employers are advisable, particularly for graduate training schemes with larger restaurants.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into restaurant management for both university graduates and school leavers.

Employers may favour candidates with a relevant degree or HND in business studies, management, hospitality management or hotel and catering.

Appropriate personal qualities, practical experience and business acumen are generally regarded as being just as important as academic qualifications. Gaining practical hotel, catering, restaurant, waitressing or customer service work experience is essential.

Key skills for restaurant managers
Excellent customer service skills
Commercial awareness
Flexibility
Good interpersonal skills
Communication skills
Problem-solving skills
Organisational skills
Teamwork skills.