Retail bankers are employed by major high street banks to undertake the strategic and day-to-day management of their branches.

Retail bankers act in a customer service role, advising on and assisting with services such as setting up savings accounts, authorising loans and moving money.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

recruiting, training, supervising and appraising banking staff
discussing the financial requirements of, and providing financial advice to clients
assessing and reviewing financial circumstances
processing payments and withdrawals
authorising and evaluating overdrafts and loans
developing a network of local business contacts
promoting the bank's services
managing budgets and meeting targets
maintaining statistical and financial records
dealing with complaints.
There are excellent promotional opportunities, such as moving to larger branches or specialising.

Typical employers of retail bankers
Retail bankers are typically employed by large banking organisations, although some are now employed by online banks and even in supermarkets. Most opportunities occur in major UK and international cities.

Vacancies are advertised by careers services, online, in TARGETjobs Finance and in national newspapers such as Business Week, The Financial Times, The London Evening Standard, Chartered Banker, The Economist andThe Banker. Applications should be made as early in the academic year as possible.

Qualifications and training required
You don’t need a degree to become a retail banker, so this career is very suited to school leavers.

Graduates can enter the profession at trainee manager level with an honours degree (minimum 2.2) in any subject, although qualifications in law, business studies, management, mathematics and economics can be advantageous.

Relevant experience gained via job shadowing, vacation work and placements in any business area can also be helpful, although not essential. Candidates must be free from bankruptcy and criminal records. Qualifications from professional institutions such as the London Institute of Banking & Finance can aid career progression.

Key skills for retail bankers
Good leadership skills
Interpersonal skills
IT skills
Analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Numerical skills
Verbal/written communication skills