Seismic interpreters use a variety of technical, computational and scientific modelling techniques to produce geophysical and geological data that can be used to analyse the hydrocarbon content of rock structures.

Seismic interpreters assess the amount of oil and gas contained within rock structures, the ease with which it can be extracted and the likelihood of encountering any hazards or problems in the process.

Those working outside of the oil and gas industry will use the data for research purposes or environmental assessments.

Key tasks include:

producing and interpreting computer-generated 2D, 3D and 4D models
using sound waves to produce geological structure maps
gathering data about the earth’s surface from acoustic readings, surveys and satellites
producing maps and cross sections of the earth’s structure
recording and analysing numerical and scientific data
using computer modelling applications to replicate seismic responses and hydrocarbon production
predicting likely changes and movements in rock structures
collecting information about rock volume and quality that can be used to measure the likely yield of oil or gas
writing scientific papers and reports
advising, liaising and consulting with colleagues, clients, consultants, researchers, external bodies and other professionals
Typical employers of seismic interpreters
Major oil extraction, exploration and production companies
Public sector organisations
British Geological Survey
Educational establishments
Research and development organisations
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)
Seismic interpretation is a specialist area of employment with only a small number of jobs available each year. Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services, specialist recruitment agencies, in national newspapers, in relevant publications such as Geoscientist and the monthly magazine sent out by the Petroleum Exploration Society of Great Britain (PESGB).

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.

Qualifications and training required
You can only become a seismic interpreter if you have a degree in a relevant subject such as geophysics, geology, geotechnology, maths and physical or applied sciences.

A relevant postgraduate qualification in geosciences, petroleum geology or other related areas is beneficial, and may be a requirement for some opportunities. A list of accredited courses is available on The Geological Society’s website. 

Pre-entry work experience can be difficult to obtain, but is helpful for entry into the profession.

Key skills for seismic interpreters
Numerical skills
IT skills
Problem-solving skills
Organisational skills
Analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Interpersonal skills
Communication skills