Site managers, also known as construction managers, are responsible for supervising construction sites and running construction projects.

Site managers are responsible for ensuring that a construction project is completed on time and within budget. Alternative job titles for site managers include construction manager, project manager and site agent. Site managers work on construction sites and work often begins just before construction. More senior construction managers will take responsibility for an entire project and may be known as the project manager or project director. More junior site managers may take responsibility for only a part of a project (also known as a package).

Key tasks include:

supervising and overseeing the direction of the project (or a package), ensuring that the client’s specifications and requirements are met, reviewing progress and liaising with quantity surveyors to monitor costs
liaising with the client, other construction professionals and, sometimes, members of the public
coordinating and supervising construction workers
selecting tools and materials
making safety inspections and ensuring construction and site safety
checking and preparing site reports, designs and drawings
maintaining quality control procedures
finding ways to prevent problems and to solve any that crop up
assessing and minimising risk
writing reports and keeping on top of paperwork
helping to negotiating contracts and securing permits and licences
As construction managers work on site wherever that site is, be prepared to relocate or face a longer commute as and when required.

Typical employers of site managers
Construction companies (typically contractors)
House building and property developing companies
The public sector (a few vacancies)
Companies that operate on or own a lot of land, such as infrastructure companies and retailers (a few vacancies)
Vacancies are advertised on TARGETjobs, on the websites of individual construction companies, by careers services and via recruitment agencies. You can also find vacancies through national newspapers and through the magazines and jobs websites of relevant professional bodies, such as the Chartered Institute of Building and Institution of Civil Engineers.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a career as a site manager for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a degree in a construction-related subject, such as construction and project management or civil engineering. Most graduate site managers work towards gaining chartership with the Chartered Institute of Building, a professional qualification you gain on the job.

Relevant experience can be beneficial to securing your graduate job. Some employers offer sponsorship, vacation work and 'year out' placements, which can provide valuable contacts and a useful insight into the profession. Most large companies advertise formal graduate schemes or individual graduate vacancies, but aspiring site managers can also send out speculative applications to smaller companies.

Key skills for site managers
Good communication skills
Problem solving skills
Decision-making ability
Commercial awareness
Ability to motivate others
Teamworking skills
Good knowledge of building methods and regulations