Typical job responsibilities include:

developing programmes of learning activities
planning, preparing and researching lessons
preparing and adapting teaching materials
making use of special facilities and/or equipment
contact and teaching time with students on an individual, class or small group basis
checking and assessing students' work and giving feedback
encouraging personal development via tutorial and pastoral work
attending meetings and reviews
liaising with parents, professionals and external agencies
writing reports
coordinating the work of support staff
Typical employers of special educational needs teachers
Special educational needs teachers work in state-maintained, voluntary-controlled (eg religious aided) and independent schools. Schools may or may not be exclusively for children with special needs. It is also possible to take on a role as a special educational needs coordinator (SENCO) in a mainstream school.

Teaching vacancies are advertised online, in local education authority (LEA) jobs lists, local and national newspapers, and in the Times Educational Supplement. Specialist recruitment agencies occasionally advertise vacancies.

Qualifications and training required
Anyone wishing to teach in the state-maintained sector must gain qualified teacher status (QTS) either by taking an education degree, an undergraduate degree followed by a PGCE (Postgraduate or Professional Graduate Certificate in Education), School-Centred Initial Teacher Training (SCITT), or employment-based School Direct training programmes. You can also take a PGCE through the Teach First programme. In Wales only, you can apply to train on the job through the Graduate Teacher Programme.

Early applications for teacher training places to UCAS Teacher Training are advisable during the first term of your final year.

All candidates must possess GCSEs (grades A-C) in English language and maths. There are also health and criminal record restrictions.

It is normally essential to possess more than two years' post-qualification mainstream teaching experience prior to taking up a special educational needs teaching post. The exception to this is for newly qualified teachers (NQTs) who can demonstrate substantial previous work experience with children with special needs.

Key skills for special educational needs teachers
Enthusiasm
Imagination
Commitment
Energy