A sports development officer will plan and organise sports projects and campaigns in order to get more people involved. They work towards making sport more accessible to everyone and aim to get people living a healthier lifestyle.

Typical job responsibilities include:

organising, developing and delivering a varied range of sporting activities or programmes
managing budgets
producing promotional material and displays
keeping statistical and financial records
planning
undertaking administrative tasks
writing reports and press releases
liaising and working with relevant organisations or agencies including youth services, schools, clubs, sports coaches and sports councils
organising and undertaking market research
monitoring and assessing progress.
The work can be demanding, with long hours and some evening, weekend and public holiday work.

Typical employers of sports development officers
Local health authorities
Sports councils
Educational institutions
Universities
Sports governing bodies
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services, in local, regional and national newspapers and in relevant publications such as Leisure Management, Leisure Week and Opportunities, as well as their online equivalents, and vacancy lists produced by sports bodies such as the Chartered Institute for the Management of Sport and Physical Activity (CIMSPA).

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both university graduates and school leavers.

Degrees in sports science, travel, tourism, leisure, business studies, management or marketing are normally advantageous.

Relevant work experience is essential, and can be gained via seasonal vacation employment, or by working as a volunteer or paid assistant in a leisure or sports centre. Coaching qualifications and experience can also be helpful.

Key skills for sports development officers
Excellent interpersonal skills
Communication skills
Organisational skills
Time management skills
Good teamworking skills
Adaptability
Enthusiasm
Energy
Confidence.