Structural engineers are primarily concerned with designing and constructing buildings and structures that are safe and capable of withstanding the elements to which they will be exposed, as well as improving the structural integrity of existing buildings. The job is very closely related to that of civil engineer.

Key tasks include:

preparing reports, designs and drawings
making calculations about loads and stresses
selecting appropriate construction materials
providing technical advice
obtaining planning and/or building regulations approval
liaising with relevant professional staff such as architects
monitoring and inspecting work undertaken by contractors
administering contracts
managing projects
inspecting properties to check conditions/foundations
Most structural engineers work either for construction/engineering consultancies – where they focus on designing structures and tend to work in an office environment – or for contractors, where they will oversee the construction of the structure, working on site. Most engineers will specialise in a type of project (or infrastructure), such as bridges or buildings. See a list of the main specialisms here.

Working hours for consultant structural engineers are typical office hours, with some overtime to meet deadlines; engineers working on site tend to have longer hours and shiftwork.

Typical employers of structural engineers
Construction/engineering consultancies
Construction/engineering contractors
Utility companies
Local authorities
Central government organisations
Vacancies are advertised by TARGETjobs, by university careers services, by recruitment agencies, via professional bodies such as the Institution of Structural Engineers, and in national newspapers and magazines such as TARGETjobs Engineering, Building Services Journal, Construction News and New Civil Engineer as well as their online equivalents.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a career in structural engineering for both university graduates and school leavers.

Graduates will need a degree in civil or structural engineering accredited by the Institution of Structural Engineers. You can then obtain one of two recognised professional qualifications with the Institution of Structural Engineers. You can apply for incorporated engineer (IEng) status with a BEng, or charted engineer (CEng) status if you graduated with a BEng plus a masters, or an MEng. Both titles will help career prospects, but chartered engineers are often of greater value to employers.

You then need to complete period of vocational training with an accredited employer, as well as a professional review, before you can obtain either of these titles. For more information, see our article on achieving chartered status.

Relevant work experience will boost your graduate application. Many employers offer sponsorship, vacation work and 'year out' placements which can provide valuable contacts and a useful insight into the profession. Read our guide to getting work experience within the construction industry.

Key skills for structural engineers
Creativity
Commercial awareness
Teamworking and communication skills
Excellent mathematical, IT and analytical skills
Good attention to detail
Project and budget management skills
A good working knowledge of construction methods, materials and legal regulations is important.