Technical sales engineers are often the key point of contact for clients, answering queries, providing technical advice and introducing new products.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

identifying and establishing new business
organising sales visits
liaising with existing clients
preparing tenders, proposals and quotations
providing pre-sales and post-sales support
negotiating contracts, terms and conditions
reviewing cost and sales performance
writing reports and sales literature
providing product education and advice
attending trade exhibitions, conferences and meetings
ensuring that sales targets are met.
Typical employers of technical sales engineers
Telecommunications companies
Electrical companies
Electronics companies
Manufacturing companies
Chemical companies
Biomedical suppliers
Agricultural businesses
Automotive businesses
Aeronautical companies
Jobs are advertised online, by careers services, recruitment agencies, in newspapers, vacancy bulletins produced by the professional organisations and in relevant publications such as Professional Engineering and The Engineer, as well as their online equivalents.

Some larger companies run graduate training schemes, for which applications should be made early in the first term of your final year. University careers services can provide information about which employers have vacancies and some companies hold on-campus presentations.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
Qualifications and training required
Entry requirements vary according to the industry you are working in. For some positions, a degree or higher national diploma (HND) in any subject is acceptable. However, some employers require sector-specific degree subjects, such as chemical engineering (for the chemical or food industry) or civil engineering (for the construction industry). Other relevant subjects include computer science, physics and maths.

With the right skills, experience and knowledge, it’s possible to enter the profession without a degree or HND. However, this will depend on the industry and employer. 

Previous relevant experience gained in any commercial/sales area involving contact with customers or the general public is beneficial for all prospective candidates.

Key skills for technical sales engineers
Strong technical skills
Organisational skills
Communication and interpersonal skills
Analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Sales skills
Commercial awareness
A full driving licence is also normally necessary.