Responsibilities of the job vary according to the time of year and size of employer, but generally include:

deciding how many holidays to sell each season and the resorts/countries to use
visiting resorts to ascertain accommodation quality and suitability
liaising with coach operators, airlines, hoteliers and resort reps
agreeing service levels, contracts and costs
confirming customer names with airlines/hotels
collecting, evaluating and responding (as appropriate) to customer feedback
using market research information to guide decisions
producing brochures and internet-based information
providing pricing information
marketing holidays to clients via travel agents, websites, brochures and television advertising
handling bookings, invoicing and issuing of tickets
predicting profits or number of bookings.
Typical employers of tour operators
Private touring companies
Small specialist organisers
Major international tour operators
Bespoke tour designers
Cruise liners
Vacancies are advertised online, in newspapers and trade publications including Travel Trade Gazette and Travel Weekly as well as their online equivalents. Networking and speculative applications are advisable, for which the Travel Trades Gazette Directory may be helpful. A few larger companies operate graduate training schemes. Paid summer vacation jobs may be available with some employers.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into becoming a tour guide for both university graduates and school leavers.

Graduates with degrees in leisure, travel, tourism, management, marketing, IT, business, languages or hotel and catering management may have an advantage. Relevant professional or vocational qualifications, such as NVQs and HNDs, may also be beneficial.

Pre-entry experience gained working with the general public or within the hotel, tourism or travel trades (particularly overseas) are advantageous.

Key skills for tour operators
A demonstrable interest in travel
Knowledge of key holiday destinations
Foreign language skills
Excellent interpersonal skills
Communication skills
Customer service skills
Organisational skills
IT skills
Commercial awareness
Good time management skills.