Toxicologists investigate toxic materials and how they can affect the environment and living organisms. The majority of toxicologists’ work is laboratory-based.

Typical responsibilities include:

designing, planning and undertaking controlled experiments and trials
devising and testing hypotheses; using appropriate analytical techniques to identify and quantify toxins
analysing and interpreting data
giving evidence in court
carrying out field studies
studying relevant literature
writing reports, reviews and papers
performing risk assessments to determine the likelihood of harmful effects
assisting in establishing regulations to protect humans, animals and the environment
collaborating and sharing expertise and research findings with scientific and technical staff
supervising staff
managing laboratories
Most opportunities for promotion arise in consultancy or staff or project management.

Typical employers of toxicologists
Water, pharmaceutical and chemical companies
The Health and Safety Executive
The Environment Agency
Universities
Hospitals
Forensic laboratories
Specialist research organisations and consultancies
Vacancies are advertised online, by recruitment agencies and careers services, in newspapers and in relevant scientific publications, such as New Scientist and its respective website. The British Toxicology Society can provide further careers information. It is advisable to apply for jobs early in the academic year.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
You can only become a toxicologist if you have a degree in an appropriate scientific subject, such as biology, biochemistry, chemistry, life sciences or medical sciences. A postgraduate qualification in toxicology or forensic science can be beneficial. 

Key skills for toxicologists
A logical and independent mind
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent written and oral communication skills
Good teamworking abilities