A training and development officer’s responsibilities will depend on the size and type of their employer.

Typical duties generally include:

conducting job evaluation surveys
liaising with managers and interviewing employees at all levels to identify and assess training and development needs
delivering and overseeing the training of individuals or groups of employees
compiling and presenting information
implementing, advising on and monitoring appraisal schemes
supervising and monitoring progress made via training programmes or schemes
ensuring employees receive statutory required training
designing and assessing training programmes.
Smaller organisations may employ human resources or personnel staff with responsibility for training and development needs in addition to other tasks.

Head to our HR areas of work section to explore possible specialisms in HR including retention and talent management.

Typical employers of training and development officers
Private companies
Manufacturers
Retailers
Local authorities
Industrial organisations
Educational institutions
Financial organisations
Large accountants
Banks
Charities
Training and development vacancies attract strong competition. Jobs are advertised by careers services and recruitment agencies, online, in newspapers and publications including People Management and Personnel Today as well as their online equivalents. It is advisable to make speculative applications and to apply early for graduate training schemes with larger employers.

To get you started, take a look at our list of employers who offer HR graduate training schemes.

Qualifications and training required
Any degree discipline is acceptable for entry into the profession, although a Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) recognised qualification is often required. Business, management and psychology qualifications can be advantageous. It may also be possible to enter this career through an apprenticeship scheme. 
Previous relevant experience is usually required and can be gained through placements, directly approaching employers, voluntary work and job shadowing. Many training officers begin their careers by working as an assistant within an HR department.

Key skills for training and development officers
Approachable
Able to form good relationships
Effective organisational skills
Teamworking skills
Interpersonal skills.
Read our article on the skills and competencies required for a career in HR to find out more.