A set designer is in charge of designing and creating the sets that appear in films, on television programmes as well as in the theatre. The role involves working and communicating with directors, producers, costume designers and other members of staff.  

Typical responsibilities include:

reading scripts
producing plans, drawings and models of sets
preparing estimates of set costs
managing budgets
viewing possible outside broadcast sites
planning
attending rehearsals/film takes
meeting with and commissioning set construction companies.
Typical employers of set designers
Theatres
Film and video production companies
Terrestrial, satellite, digital, cable and independent television companies
Advertising agencies
Music video production companies
Experienced designers (particularly film set designers) commonly work on a self-employed/freelance basis.

Vacancies are advertised online, in national newspapers and in specialist publications including The Stage newspaper, Broadcast, The Knowledge, Ariel (for BBC jobs) and Screen International as well as their online equivalents.

Qualifications and training required
Although there are routes into this profession for both university graduates and school leavers, employers will prefer candidates with degrees in theatre studies, creative or performing arts, drama, fine or visual arts, graphic or 3D design, illustration, architecture and landscape architecture.

The ability to demonstrate a genuine interest in, knowledge or experience of visual arts, culture and television, film or theatre is essential, and often more important than academic qualifications.

Job shadowing and unpaid/vacation work experience can be helpful. It is essential to make speculative applications – directories such as the British Theatre Directory, KFTV, Broadcast Production Guide, Kays Production Manual, the Guardian Media Directory, and Contacts contain useful contact information.

To find out how to get into a career in this area via a school leaver route, visit the media section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers.

Key skills
Stamina
Creativity
Enthusiasm
Determination
Perseverance
Imagination
Adaptability
Working well under pressure
Good spatial awareness
Technical skills