UX (user experience) designers measure and optimise applications (usually web based) to improve ease of use (usability), and create the best user experience by exploring many different approaches to solve end-users’ problems. One way that a UX designer might do this is by conducting in-person user tests to observe behaviour. They then refine and tweak apps, software and websites to create products that people like and find easy to use.

A similar role is that of a UI (user interface) designer. However, UI designers focus more on designing the presentation and interactivity of a product. Some roles combine both UX and UI.

For a UX designer, typical duties include:

considering existing applications and evaluating their UX (user experience) effectiveness
considering the human-computer interaction (HCI) element of a design
using online tools, such as screen readers, to aid their research
running user testing of applications, software and websites
defining interaction models, user task flows, and UI (user interface) specifications
communicating scenarios (hypothetical users), end-to-end experiences, interaction models, and screen designs to other people working on a product
working with creative directors and visual designers to incorporate a visual or brand identity into the finished product
developing and maintaining design wireframes (basic mock-ups of applications) and specifications
Typical employers of UX designers
Financial services organisations
Manufacturing companies
Educational institutions
Banks
Specialist software development companies
Consulting firms
Telecommunications companies
Public sector organisations
Self-employment is also an option for UX designers
UX design jobs are advertised online, by careers services and by recruitment agencies.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into UX design for both graduates and school leavers. Many UX jobs advertised ask for a bachelors degree in a design or computing-related subject, such as HCI (human computer interaction). To enter the profession without a degree, you could start out in another digital design role and specialise in UX when you have built up a portfolio of experience. Alternatively you could start by seeking out one of the few UX apprenticeships available.

To find out more about getting into IT and technology via a school leaver route, visit the IT and technology section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers.

Key skills for UX designers
Artistic eye for design
Ability to think creatively
Mathematical aptitude and strong problem-solving skills
Excellent IT and programming skills
Excellent organisational, time and project management skills
Accuracy and attention to detail
An understanding of the latest trends and their role in a commercial environment
Self-development skills to keep up to date with fast-changing trends
Professional approach to time, costs and deadlines