Veterinary nurses care for animals that are being treated in a veterinary practice. They also help to educate owners on how best to look after their pets.

Responsibilities of the job include:

administering drugs, anaesthetics and injections
preparing animals for surgery
holding and monitoring animals during operations
maintaining, sterilising and laying out surgical equipment
cleaning up after surgery
undertaking diagnostic tests
preparing and sending off laboratory samples
taking x-rays
caring for, exercising and grooming animal ‘in-patients'
giving advice to owners about caring for and breeding animals
keeping records
writing and filing reports
Typical employers of veterinary nurses
Private veterinary practices
Animal centres or hospitals
Zoos
Government organisations such as the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (DEFRA)
Animal welfare organisations and charities such as the RSPCA, Blue Cross and PDSA
Pharmaceuticals manufacturers
Vacancies are advertised online and in newspapers and specialist publications such as Veterinary Record. Voluntary work may be available with larger veterinary practices, animal boarding centres or organisations such as the RSPCA, PDSA, Cats Protection and Blue Cross.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a veterinary nursing career for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a degree in veterinary nursing, accredited by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS). For the entry onto the course, a minimum of two A levels ( preferably including biology and another science subject) or 240 UCAS points from two Scottish Advanced Highers or three Scottish Highers are required.

School leavers will need a level three diploma in veterinary nursing – also accredited by the RCVS – and must complete work placements at a veterinary practice that qualifies as an approved training centre. Five GCSEs at grades A*–C, or five Scottish Standards at grades one to three, are required. These must include English, maths and a science subject. A list of approved training providers and qualifications are available on the RCVS website. To find out more about how you can get into this career via a school leaver route (eg an apprenticeship or school leaver training programme), see the science section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers.

Previous experience of working with animals, such as in a veterinary practice or an animal shelter, is advantageous.

Key skills for veterinary nurses
Caring
Responsible
Reliable
Good teamworking skills
Communication skills
Interpersonal skills
Administrative skills