Veterinary surgeons are required to practice medicine on animals on a daily basis. This could be anything from giving injections, to delivering baby animals or performing complex surgeries. Other responsibilities include:

diagnosing illnesses in a variety of different animals
prescribing the appropriate treatment or operating on the animal if necessary
dealing with uncooperative animals and owners
carrying out health checks and providing vaccinations
facing a number of ethical considerations, such as deciding whether to put an animal to sleep
knowing the laws surrounding animals and their welfare
giving advice to owners regarding their animals, eg dietary recommendations
taking x-rays and blood tests
working on-call for emergency cases
You may be frequently required to work overtime and weekend slots. For a fully qualified veterinary surgeon salaries are typically quite generous, but you are likely to earn more working with small or companion animals than you are working with large animals or livestock. 

Typical employers of veterinary surgeons
Private veterinary practices and surgeries
Zoos
Animal charities such as the RSPCA, Blue Cross, PDSA and Cats Protection
Government organisations such as the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (DEFRA)
Royal Army Veterinary Corps (RAVC)
Pharmaceuticals manufacturers
Some vets may also work freelance, as a partner in a practice or as a consultant. There are plenty of opportunities to work overseas, with veterinary volunteers in high demand.

Qualifications and training required
You can only become a veterinary surgeon if you have a degree in veterinary medicine. To practice in the UK, you need to be registered with the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS). In order to do this, you will need to have graduated with a degree from an RCVS approved veterinary school. A list of these are available on the RCVS website. If this is not the case then you will have to take the RCVS Statutory Membership Exam. Applications usually close in February.

Any previous work experience is beneficial. Volunteering opportunities may be available within veterinary practices, animal boarding centres and charities such as the RSPCA, PDSA, Cats Protection and Blue Cross.

Key skills for veterinary surgeons
A love of animals
Empathy, patience and sensitivity
Rational objectivity
A thorough, methodical approach
Communication skills
Scientific ability
Calmness in pressurised or emotional situations