Video game developers, also known as games developers or video game programmers, write code for games for a variety of formats, such as PCs, consoles, web browsers and mobile phones. They take the video game designer’s ideas, drawings and rules, and turn them into a playable game with visuals and sound through writing code.

The work of a games developer typically involves:

Looking at the design specifications of video game designers
Writing code to turn the designer’s concepts into a playable game
Using application program interfaces (APIs) – a set of pre-built commands that allow different softwares to interact
Programming the game’s terrain
Programming artificial intelligence for non-player characters within the game
PayScale research suggests that games developers and programmers can earn above £30,000, even in starting roles. Find out the typical starting salaries for graduates in IT jobs here.

Typical employers of video game developers
Video game developing companies (known as video game developers and video game studios)
Video game publishers
Vacancies are advertised online – by employers and on IT jobs boards such as IT Jobs Watch – as well as by recruitment agencies, careers services and by TARGETjobs.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into video game development for university graduates. Other posts in related fields may be open to school leavers.

Graduates will require a degree in computer science, software engineering or a related subject. If you have an unrelated degree but are proficient in relevant programming languages and familiar with the gaming industry, you could also be eligible for entry-level positions. Work experience and a portfolio of work will become essential early on in your career in this very competitive industry.

School leavers may progress to video game development by undertaking an apprenticeship in software development or a related role. 
Key skills for video game developers
Creativity
A passion for video games
Wide-ranging knowledge of gaming trends
Strong analytical frame of mind
Ability to work as part of a team
Proficiency in programming languages, such as C# and C++