Volunteer work organisers are responsible for the recruitment, training and management of voluntary workers.
Relevant work experience and voluntary sector knowledge are valued more than academic qualifications.
Key skills

The role of a volunteer work organiser is varied but will include people management and recruiting, managing budgets and helping out with training.

Key responsibilities of the job include:

advertising volunteer opportunities
interviewing and selecting volunteers
providing or arranging appropriate training
coordinating and supporting the work of volunteers
organising/undertaking publicity tasks aimed at attracting new volunteers
managing budgets
helping with fundraising activities
producing advertising/publicity materials
helping to increase the number of volunteer opportunities within the organisation
Paid vacancies attract strong competition – many people working in such positions begin as volunteers themselves.
ADVERTISE HERE


Typical employers of volunteer work organisers
Charities
Local authorities
Voluntary and non-profit making organisations
Private trusts
Foundations
Opportunities are advertised by careers services, in newspapers, in Community Care and specialist charity sector publications, in Charity Times and Third Sector as well as their online equivalents. Many jobs are only advertised internally, so speculative applications are advisable, for which the Voluntary Agencies Directory and Charities Digest may be useful. Local charities and volunteer bureaux can often provide work experience placements.

Qualifications and training required
There are no set qualifications for entry into the profession, so you can become a volunteer work organiser both with or without a degree.

For graduates, any degree subject is acceptable, although a business studies, management or social administration qualification may be helpful. Relevant work experience and voluntary sector knowledge is normally more valued than academic qualifications, so it’s important to undertake as much volunteer work as possible.

To find out more about getting into charity work via a school leaver route see the public sector section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers.

Key skills for volunteer work organisers
Enthusiastic
Excellent interpersonal skills
Time management skills
Communication skills
Good verbal and numerical abilities
Sensitivity
Diplomacy
Discretion
Capable of working well with others
Efficient
Systematic
Organised