Warehouse managers are responsible for organising the safe and efficient receipt, storage and despatch of warehoused goods.
Employers may prefer graduates with a qualification in distribution, logistics, transportation, management, business studies or retail management.


Typical responsibilities of the job include:

processing orders
operating mechanical and IT systems
liaising with customers and other departments
training, supervising and appraising staff
maintaining statistical and financial records
planning
ensuring that quality objectives and delivery deadlines are met
managing budgets
administering stock control
ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation
There are many similarities with the work of logistics and distribution managers.

Typical employers of warehouse managers
Specialist logistics, distribution and haulage companies
Manufacturers
The armed forces
Major commercial organisations
Retailers
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, by recruitment agencies and in national newspapers and specialist publications such as Logistics and Supply Chain, as well as their online equivalents. Early applications are advisable for logistics and distribution training scheme vacancies – especially for those with major employers. General warehouse work within smaller organisations may ultimately lead to managerial positions.


Qualifications and training required
You don’t need a university degree to become a warehouse manager. However, the role is not normally an entry-level position and usually requires experience of working in a warehouse and sometimes qualifications in logistics or management. Typical entry-level roles in this field include warehouse assistant and warehouse operative. Apprenticeships are available in warehouse and logistics roles. Find out more about apprenticeships on TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers, which contains advice and apprenticeship vacancies. Employers may also advertise apprenticeships on their websites or in the local press.

Graduates can become warehouse managers if they have warehouse experience. Graduate schemes in logistics, offered by the likes of Royal Mail and DHL, may provide warehouse management experience and could allow you to take your career in this direction. These schemes are often open to graduates in all degree subjects, though sometimes employers express a preference for a logistics- or business-related degree. You can see vacancies on TARGETjobs here.

View our graduate logistics, transport and supply chain vacancies and internships

Key skills for warehouse managers
Good teamworking skills
Managerial skills
Interpersonal skills
Verbal and written communication skills
Logical reasoning
Numerical skills
Technical skills
IT skills