Water engineers work on projects such as flood defence schemes and sewer improvement programmes at all stages, from conception and planning to completion and handover. Typical responsibilities include:

producing designs, both initial outlines and full plans, of sewerage, water treatment and flood defence structures such as pump systems and pipe networks
managing and maintaining water and sewerage infrastructure operations
presenting project details and technical information to colleagues and clients
writing reports
managing project budgets
keeping up to date with changes in regulatory legislation and guidelines
writing and advertising tender documents and managing contracts
liaising with clients, contractors, government agencies, local authorities and suppliers
monitoring flood levels
supervising staff and site workers
using a variety of specialist computer applications/simulation software
ensuring that projects keep to budgets and timescales
maintaining an awareness of current environmental issues.
Typical employers of water engineers
Privately owned water companies
Regulatory bodies
The Environment Agency
The Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA)
Local authority environmental health departments
British Waterways
Private consultants or contractors
Charities such as WaterAid
Job vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in publications such as TARGETjobs Engineering, New Scientist, ICE Recruit and New Civil Engineer, as well as their online equivalents.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
You can only become a water engineer if you have a degree in a relevant subject such as chemical, civil, mechanical or environmental engineering, environmental science, geology or physical geography. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

A postgraduate qualification may be required for some positions, and can be beneficial for graduates without relevant first degrees. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate study to explore your options.

If you are aiming to work in a technician role, it is possible to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) in an appropriate subject such as mechanical or civil engineering.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for water engineers
Excellent analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Problem-solving skills
Good time management
IT skills
Communication skills
The ability to demonstrate a genuine knowledge and interest of the water industry and environmental issues.