A web designer is responsible for creating the design and layout of a website or web pages. It and can mean working on a brand new website or updating an already existing site. Their role is different to web developers, who specialise in making web designs a reality or writing code that dictates how different parts of the website fit together. However, there can be crossover between the two roles.

Responsibilities of the job include:

creating website designs
producing sample sites
meeting with clients to discuss requirements and/or project progress
demonstrating and receiving feedback about draft sites
keeping up to date with recent technological and software developments
developing skills and expertise in appropriate software/programming languages such as HTML and Javascript
creating products that are user-friendly, effective and appealing
digital retouching and image editing
working as part of a multidisciplinary team
There can be some pressure to meet deadlines and so extra hours may be required.

Typical employers of web designers
Software companies
IT consultancies
Specialist web design companies
Large corporate organisations
Any organisation that uses computer systems
Self-employment/freelance work is often possible for individuals with appropriate experience. Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and by recruitment agencies.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into web design for both university graduates and school leavers. For jobs advertised to graduates, employers are likely to seek a degree in digital media design or a related subject. Whether you have a related degree or not, you will need to be able to present a portfolio of your best web design work.

School leavers wanting to go into web design should look out for web designer apprenticeships and should expect to have to prove their interest, for example by having relevant work experience to talk about. 

Key skills for web designers
Imagination
Creativity
Patience
Attention to detail
Analytical skills
Communication skills
Technical ability
Excellent IT skills
SEO knowledge
Experience of using programmes such as PhotoShop and InDesign