Youth workers are responsible for a number of organisational and fundraising roles. The job will involve working with children and young people from a variety of backgrounds, so good communication skills are important.

Responsibilities of the job typically include:

managing projects
planning and organising appropriate youth and community programmes
establishing new youth services
recruiting, training and supervising volunteers and paid employees
undertaking detached ‘outreach' youth work
producing reports and business plans
giving presentations
promoting young people's interests
maintaining records
managing and administering budgets and resources
preparing and distributing publicity materials and displays
liaising and working with parents, schools, the police and other community groups/organisations
providing advocacy and counselling
raising funds
Hours are fairly typical, but as a key support worker you may be required to be on hand in the case of an emergency.


Typical employers of youth workers
Local education authorities (LEAs)
Local government
Health and housing departments
Independent, voluntary and charitable organisations
Most people enter youth work as volunteers or as part-time workers and are normally called youth support workers. Vacancies are advertised online, in newspapers, local authority jobs lists and publications including The Big Issue, Community Care, The Times Educational Supplement and The Scotsman as well as their online equivalents.

Qualifications and training required
As a graduate, you can only become a youth worker if you have a relevant degree that has been validated by the National Youth Agency (NYA). You can do a validated BA (Hons) degree or, if you already have a degree in a subject unrelated to youth work, you can do a postgraduate level qualification. The NYA publishes a list of validated courses on its website.

School leavers can do an apprenticeship followed by work-based qualifications to qualify as a youth support worker (as opposed to the graduate route that qualifies you as a youth worker). Employers may then support you to go on and qualify as a youth worker after your apprenticeship. There are two types of apprenticeship: the intermediate level apprenticeship allows you to train as an assistant youth support worker; the advanced level apprenticeship allows you to train as a youth support worker. Apprenticeships are advertised on the government website.


Most employers and providers of youth work training will ask that you have some paid or voluntary experience of working with young people. This can be gained by involvement in student community schemes, pressure groups or community projects. Placements may also be available from local charities and volunteer bureaux. You will need a Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) check to work with children.

Key skills
Organisation
Verbal and written communication skills
Maturity
Reliability
Responsibility
Resilience