Aeronautical engineers design, develop, manufacture, maintain and modify military and civil aircraft, aeronautical components and associated systems.

Aeronautical engineers use their technical knowledge to improve flight safety and fuel efficiency, reduce costs and address the environmental impact of air travel. They also work with aircraft that operates in space such as robots and satellites.

Aeronautical engineers typically work in multidisciplinary engineering teams where responsibilities include:

assessing design requirements
agreeing budgets, timescales and specifications with clients and managers
undertaking theoretical and practical research
producing and implementing designs and test procedures
measuring and improving the performance of aircraft, components and systems
assembling the aircraft or fitting components
testing, evaluating, modifying and re-testing products
writing reports, manuals and documentation
providing technical advice
analysing and interpreting data.
You can find out more about aeronautical engineering by reading our aerospace industry sector overview, written by an experienced aerospace engineer.

Typical employers of aeronautical engineers
Aeronautical engineers may be office-based, or they may work in aircraft workshops, production hangars or aeronautical laboratories. Local and national travel between sites may be necessary.

Typical employers include:

Aerospace and aero-engine companies
Airline operators
Research and development organisations
Contract agencies
Consultancies
The Civil Service
The armed forces
Government agencies such as The Ministry of Defence
Universities
An aeronautical education is widely respected. Due to the excellent reputation of the UK aerospace industry, graduates may find opportunities for permanent or temporary employment abroad. They can do this by undertaking professional courses, attending conferences and through working within international partnerships and consortiums (a combination of businesses working towards a joint venture).

Lengthy career breaks are difficult due to the need to keep up to date with recent technological developments.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
Engineering employers typically seek graduates with an MEng in a relevant engineering discipline such as aerospace, electronics, mechanical, software and materials. Relevant work experience is widely valued. Summer internships and industrial placements are often used by employers to find graduate recruits. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Postgraduate study can be advantageous: graduates with postgraduate research qualifications may earn higher starting salaries. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate options to explore your options.

Entry into the profession is also possible through an apprenticeship. Apprentices typically end up working as engineering technicians, fitters, machinists and modellers. To become an aeronautical engineer, you will need to complete further qualifications such as a degree, and your employer may sponsor you to do so.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MSc) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Royal Aeronautical Society. You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for aeronautical engineers
The work environment is multidisciplinary, so a clear understanding of how aerospace engineering relates to other engineering disciplines is essential. Given the frequency of international partnerships, language skills are useful and the ability to work as part of a team is crucial. Aeronautical engineers must also have:

strong mathematical, analytical and problem solving skills
technical expertise
creativity and innovative thinking
attention to detail
a strong awareness of safety issues
communication skills, both verbal and written
project and time management skills
a commitment to keeping up to date with technical developments
the ability to work under pressure and meet deadlines