Animal nutritionists are scientists who analyse the nutritional value of animal feeds and provide livestock dietary advice to farming, agricultural and public sector staff.

Animal nutritionists undertake research and plan diets in order to provide domestic animals and livestock with nutritionally balanced food stuffs. Responsibilities of the job include:

assessing the relative nutritional values of various feeds
supporting the work of agricultural advisers/consultants
visiting farms
interpreting forage analysis
using specialist computer software to devise diets and produce reports
working with clients to formulate diets that meet their requirements/objectives
analysing nutritional disorders
maintaining awareness of technical and scientific developments
Working hours can be irregular but it is not usually necessary to work during weekends. Freelance work is an option once you have accumulated experience and contacts.

Typical employers of animal nutritionists
Animal and pet feed manufacturers
Agricultural Development and Advisory Service (ADAS)
Scotland’s Rural College
Nutritional research centres
Hannah Research Institute
Government agricultural departments
Universities
Consultancies
Jobs are advertised by specialist recruitment agencies, in local/national newspapers and publications including New Scientist, Farmers Weekly, The Scottish Farmer, Farmers Guardian, Horse and Hound and their online equivalents. The larger animal feed companies may run graduate recruitment schemes, though these are not necessarily available every year.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualification and training required
A degree in nutrition, equine studies, animal/veterinary science, medical sciences, agriculture, or dietetics is usually required for entry into the profession. Graduates from closely related degree disciplines (biology for example) may also be eligible if they undertake a relevant postgraduate qualification. Some vacancies may require a relevant PhD. 

Pre-entry work experience can be helpful. It may be helpful to register with the Nutrition Society, which costs £20 for students and graduates. Both experienced and inexperienced graduates can also register with the Association for Nutrition.

Key skills for animal nutritionists
Ability to undertake independent research
Ability to communicate with clients, customers and fellow scientists
IT and numeracy skills
Self management and self motivation
Ability to write reports and keep good records
A full driving licence is very useful.