Archaeologists study human history by examining artefacts, which range from prehistoric tools and buildings to animal bones and tiny organisms.

Archaeologists study past human activity by excavating, dating and interpreting objects and sites of historical interest. They implement excavation projects at historical sites and collect data that informs their understanding of the past.

Major responsibilities of the job include:

using geophysical surveys and aerial photography to locate suitable excavation sites
planning surveys and excavations
examining, documenting and preserving artefacts
producing, compiling and maintaining written, photographic and drawn records and electronic databases
supervising and guiding staff
collecting, analysing and interpreting data
writing reports, papers and other articles for publication
dating and interpreting finds
mathematical, statistical and computational modelling
assessing planning applications for building developers
creating virtual simulations of how sites or artefacts would have looked
Excavations and job vacancies are advertised in bulletins from the Institute for Archaeologists, national newspapers and specialist publications such as Current Archaeology or those provided or promoted by the Council for British Archaeology (CBA). Vacancies for volunteers are advertised in a range of places including CBA Briefings and the Fieldwork Opportunities Bulletin. The British Archaeological Yearbook is a useful source of information for networking and speculative applications. For guidance on speculative applications see our page: making speculative applications.

Although archaeological fieldwork usually takes place in teams, it is possible to work on a self-employed basis. Opportunities for national and international travel may arise through different dig locations, consultancy work with international development organisations, or through attendance of professional conferences.

Typical employers of archaeologists
Local authorities
National organisations such as English Heritage, National Trust, Historic Scotland and Cadw (the historic environment service of the Welsh Assembly)
Museums
Professional and commercial developers
University archaeological units
Archaeological trusts
While the job is physically tiring and involves long periods of time working outdoors in all kinds of weather, most archaeologists are passionate about their work and enjoy the thrill of discovering more about past civilisations.

Archaeologists may work in many different roles and specialisations according to practical expertise or particular periods of the past. These specialisations may in turn allow archaeologists to work in other fields, such as forensic investigation of modern crimes or climate change research. Many teaching opportunities are also available, as local archaeological groups are becoming increasingly popular.

Qualifications and training required
While academic qualifications are not always essential, most paid employees have an archaeology degree. Many careers in archaeology lead to academia, for which outstanding undergraduate and postgraduate qualifications are usually necessary due to the fierce level of competition. It is also worth noting than earning a good salary in archaeology without a degree may be difficult.

Graduates from degree disciplines other than archaeology will need to obtain a relevant postgraduate qualification, although qualifications in scientific and engineering subjects may be useful in laboratory analysis or reconstruction and restoration projects. Previous study in historical subjects will be helpful, while knowledge of modern or historical languages, such as Latin or ancient Greek, may be useful when interpreting finds or collaborating with foreign colleagues.

Whatever the role, archaeological experience is essential. Organised training excavations and field schools can offer excellent structured training programmes and practical experience. Details of these can be obtained from The Council for British Archaeology, but bear in mind that a fee may be charged for accommodation, food and tuition. A wealth of alternative opportunities also exists on a local, national and international scale; details can be found in specialist publications and on relevant websites.

It is also advisable to become a member of a professional archaeological body, such as the British Archaeological Association. Student memberships allow access to research centres, journals and prize funds for research.

School leavers considering a career in archaeology should gain as much experience as possible by joining the Young Archaeologists Club or your local archaeology society. Although a degree is not always essential, an undergraduate degree will likely speed up progression in your career and is very often a requirement for employers. If you choose to study a subject other than archaeology, you will probably be expected to obtain a relevant postgraduate qualification. Previous study in historical subjects will also be helpful.

Key skills for archaeologists
Work on excavations can be physically demanding; it will help you to have a good level of fitness, as well as patience and enthusiasm. You will also need to make sure that your tetanus vaccinations are up to date. In addition, the following attributes are valued by archaeologists and their employers:

Meticulous attention to detail
Written communication skills
Accurate recording and reporting skills, including writing, drawing and photography skills
An inquisitive mind
Ability to extract and analyse data
Presentation skills
Good IT skills
Driving licence
Good time management
Flexibility in terms of location
Teamwork