Art therapists use art to help patients cope with emotional and mental health problems and allow them to express emotions and feelings.

Art therapy aims to help patients overcome emotional, mental and behavioural difficulties by engaging with, and expressing themselves through, the artistic process.

Practitioners work with a wide range of patients who are affected by a variety of problems, including clinical or bipolar depression, phobias, anxiety and behavioural disorders.

The therapy aims to channel patients’ energies into painting, sculpture and other forms of expression (including theatre and dance) and help them to understand and address their inner conflicts.

Art therapists play an active part in the sessions, guiding patients through the creative process and encouraging them to engage with their feelings and explore the thought processes behind them.

The works of art that are produced can have an enlightening or cathartic effect for the patient and help them address emotional issues. Typical activities in the role include:

meeting patients or clients and arranging activities and sessions
planning and facilitating activities, and maintaining the workshop and equipment
listening to patients or clients and advising them on suitable activities
organising and carrying out one-on-one and group workshops
in group workshops, encouraging members of the group to relate to each other through their art
liaising with other professionals, including those working in medicine, healthcare and education, social services, and the prison and probation services
attending seminars, workshops and conferences to discuss treatment methods and share ideas and experience
encouraging patients or clients to explore their art and think about it means to them
referring patients or clients to other therapists and health professionals
Conditions of work, along with the job title, will depend on the employer. For example, an art therapist might practise as an art tutor in a prison or as a group worker in a day centre run by social services.

Hours will typically be 9.00 am to 5.00 pm but therapists must be prepared to put in extra time and be flexible towards patient needs.

Vacancies are advertised on NHS Jobs and by recruitment websites and online publications. Salaries will largely depend on your employer but you can expect higher salaries in the private sector.

Typical employers of art therapists
The NHS
Private health sector
Services for children, adolescents and older people
Social services
Local education authorities
The prison service
Charities
Some private organisations
Qualifications and training required
Art therapists need a postgraduate diploma in art therapy or psychotherapy that is recognised by the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC). Course providers often require candidates to hold a first degree in an art-based subject, although relevant qualifications such as nursing, teaching or social work may be accepted. The British Assocation of Art Therapists (BAAT) provides a list of recommended courses on their website (see the link below). Study takes two years full time, or three years part time, and must be followed by registration with the HCPC before official practice can start.

It is helpful to have some relevant experience of working in mental health, education, special needs or social services before applying for postgraduate training in art therapy. However, it can be difficult to gain direct experience before qualification due to the sensitive nature of the work. Try to get as much experience as possible by volunteering and work shadowing in related environments such as schools, hospitals, prisons and care centres. Placements can be gained by approaching employers directly, volunteering or asking to shadow staff members.

Once qualified art therapists must undertake continuing professional development to make sure their professional knowledge and skills are up to date.

Key skills for art therapists
Excellent artistic abilities, creativity, imagination and enthusiasm
Maturity, patience and a calm, respectful manner
Ability to provide a trusting, open, kindhearted atmosphere that encourages learning and participation
A non-judgemental approach and ability to work with people from all walks of life
Ability to deal with difficult, perhaps painful and embarrassing situations
Excellent interpersonal, communication and listening skills
A strong knowledge and understanding of the theory and practice of psychotherapy and the role art can play in treatment
Business skills for private practice