Arts administrators organise and promote artistic performances and exhibitions, aiding and facilitating the work of artists.

Arts administration encompasses a wide range of roles – from community arts promotion, to theatre and front-of-house work and festival organisation. There is no typical job profile and arts administrators may have marketing, advertising, publicity, market research or public relations roles. Alternatively, they may be responsible for general or financial administration, project management, accountancy or human resource management.

Irregular hours are common but there are advantages to the job; arts administrators can expect to be some of the first people to see a new show and they will be working alongside people who are very passionate about their jobs.

Vacancies are advertised in newspapers, regional arts magazines and specialist publications such as The Stage and their online equivalents. As with many roles in the sector, starting salaries are fairly low and you may have to take up a lot of short term or seasonal contracts.

Typical employers of arts administrators
Regional arts boards (RABs)
Government-funded arts councils of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
Local authorities
Charities
Theatres
Galleries, museums and arts centres
Festival/venue offices
Dance companies
Universities
Qualifications and training required
You do not need a degree to become an arts administrator. However, while no degree is required, an arts administration MA, or an artistic or business management qualification can be helpful. Vacancies attract fierce competition, so a strong body of relevant work experience is vital. This can be gained by volunteering or working part-time with venues, helping to organise university events or by assisting with arts festivals. A demonstrable passion for the arts is also vital.

Key skills for arts administrators
Administrators will need to have good communication skills in order to manage artists and engage with the public. Other key skills include:

numeracy
negotiating contracts
managing budgets
working well under pressure
promoting and publicising events
IT skills