Cartographers study, design, produce and distribute digital and conventional maps, charts, spreadsheets and diagrams for public sector and commercial customers.

Cartographers are concerned with all aspects of map-making (scientific, technological and artistic). They are responsible for:

researching, collecting, storing, retrieving, evaluating and manipulating data
designing maps
checking the accuracy of maps
liaising with information providers, clients and external contacts
accessing and using aerial photographs and satellite images
Information technology plays an important role within the profession, and has dramatically changed the nature of the work. Traditional scribing, tracing and lettering map-making processes have been replaced with remote sensing, computerised mapping and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) packages. Data is collected, stored and transferred electronically, and computers are used to design, create and produce maps.

Typical employers of cartographers
Cartographers are employed by government organisations such as the MET Office, Ordnance Survey, and the Hydrographic Office. Other employers include:

local authorities
utilities companies
service agencies, such as The AA
private consultancies
commercial map publishers
Qualifications and training required
To become a cartographer you will usually need a degree in a relevant subject, although school leavers can enter the profession by gaining experience in the Royal Air Force (RAF) or the Army.

For graduates, a variety of degree subjects are acceptable for entry into the profession. These include geology, earth sciences, civil/structural engineering, surveying, geography, geophysics/geochemistry, marine sciences, oceanography, computer science and software engineering. Graduates who hold a postgraduate qualification in a subject such as GIS, cartography, photogrammetry, surveying or remote sensing will normally be at an advantage.

School leavers can apply to the Royal Air Force (RAF) as an air cartographer or to the British Army as a geographic technician. 

Key skills for cartographers
Would-be cartographers must be able to demonstrate a genuine interest in the work, and must have meticulous attention to detail and good IT and design skills.