Chemical engineers are responsible for the chemical, biochemical and physical processes and machinery used to transform raw materials into valuable products.

Chemical engineers (or process engineers) are responsible for developing new industrial processes and designing new process plants and equipment or modifying existing ones. The processes that they come up with are used to create products ranging from oil and gas to food and drink. The role can include:

testing new processes
collecting data required to make improvements and modifications
overseeing the construction of new plants
using and developing process simulation software to work out the best production methods
purchasing and installing equipment
using scientific principles related to magnitude, momentum, heat transfer etc
supervising plant operations
investigating and troubleshooting plant/process problems
scheduling and coordinating work to tight deadlines and within financial budgets
ensuring that equipment works to its specification and to appropriate capacities
assessing safety and environmental issues
liaising with installation/project engineers and specialists
ensuring safe working conditions and compliance with health and safety legislation.
You can find out more about chemical engineering by reading our chemicals industry sector overview, written by an experienced chemical engineer.

Typical employers of chemical engineers
Chemical production and process companies (for example, pharmaceutical, consumer goods, synthetics, plastics, paints and polymer manufacturers)
The water treatment industry
Food manufacturers
Oil refining/petrochemical companies and associated service and contractor companies
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in local and national newspapers and in a number of technical journals such as TARGETjobs Engineering, The Chemical Engineer, Chemistry & Industry and Materials World.You can also find help on finding and applying for jobs with smaller engineering companies here.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant subject such as chemical engineering, biochemical engineering or mechanical engineering. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

A postgraduate qualification can be beneficial, and may be necessary for some posts. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate options to explore your options.

For school leavers, higher apprenticeships in process engineering or in various aspects of manufacturing engineering are available. 

Opportunities to gain experience and an insight into the profession are provided by many employers via vacation work, sponsorship and industrial placements.Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for chemical engineers
An aptitude for and interest in chemistry
IT and numeracy skills
Analytical skills
Commercial awareness
The ability to work well under pressure
Communication and teamworking skills
Problem-solving skills