Commissioning editors are responsible for managing publishers’ book lists and signing agreements for new publications.

The majority of commissioning editors begin their careers as editorial assistants, progressing through the ranks once they’ve gained relevant skills and experience.

Commissioning editors are employed by commercial book publishers and professional/academic publishers. Freelance work may be an option for editors with substantial experience.

Responsibilities of the job include:

negotiating agreements/contracts with literary agents/authors
planning, organising and monitoring the progress of projects
undertaking market research/investigating market trends
reading, evaluating and commissioning titles
liaison with authors, literary agents, marketing and production staff including designers and printers
supervising the work of editorial staff
attending book fairs
writing reports.
Budgetary constraints, tight deadlines and long hours can make the work stressful at times.

Typical employers of commissioning editors
Commissioning editors are typically employed by publishing houses and academic publishers. Many jobs receive little advertising and, as a result, those that are advertised attract intense competition. Networking, job shadowing and speculative applications are essential. Part-time and temporary jobs can often lead to permanent work.

Vacancies are advertised in newspapers and publications such as The Bookseller and Print Week. Recruitment agencies also advertise opportunities.

Qualifications and training required
Although you don’t technically need a degree to become a commissioning editor, it will be helpful in your application and career path; entry into the profession without a degree is unusual.

A large number of editors are English graduates but any degree discipline is acceptable for entry into the profession. An MA in publishing, specialist knowledge or a science/languages background may be required for some opportunities. Several years of publishing, copy-writing, editing, journalism or media sales pre-entry experience are essential.

Key skills for commissioning editors
Enthusiasm
Adaptable
Able to work well under pressure
Capable of meeting deadlines
IT skills
Administrative skills
Verbal and written communication skills