Communications engineers are responsible for the research, design, development and production of communications equipment and systems.

Communications engineers design and modify electrical communications systems for scientific, military, industrial or commercial use. The level of in-depth technical and design work varies; after a few years of experience many communications engineers will start to move into managerial and consultancy roles.

Responsibilities typically include:

managing, monitoring the performance of and working as part of a team of communication engineers and planners
agreeing project budgets, timescales and specifications with clients and managers
undertaking site surveys
producing, testing and implementing designs
creating test procedures
producing disaster management plans
ensuring that objectives and deadlines are met
attending conferences and briefings on new products and networks
writing reports and documentation
making presentations
managing resources
liaising with suppliers, customers, directors and other teams of staff
undertaking relevant research
analysing and interpreting data
providing technical support
organising and attending meetings.
Typical employers of communications engineers
Most communications engineers work for telecommunications companies and manufacturers and installers of communication devices and systems. Self-employment via consultancy/contract work is possible for individuals with several years' experience.

Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in relevant publications including The Engineer and TARGETjobs Engineering.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
Most communications engineers possess a good honours degree in a relevant subject, such as communications engineering, electrical engineering, electronic engineering, physics, telecommunications or computer science. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

A postgraduate qualification can also be helpful, and may be necessary for research positions. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate study to explore your options.

If you are aiming to work in a technician role, it is possible to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) or through an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as electronic or electrical engineering. 

Relevant experience is valuable. Some employers offer final year project work, sponsorship, vacation work or industrial placements, which can provide valuable contacts and a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree with honours in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for communications engineers
Employers seek committed, business-minded candidates with strong technical abilities. To become a communications engineer, you must also have:

excellent communication and interpersonal skills
analytical and problem-solving skills
organisational and managerial skills
presentation skills
the ability to work well under pressure
teamworking skills.
Some positions require candidates to possess a driving licence.