Control and instrumentation engineers research, design, develop and install the devices and systems used in manufacturing facilities and plants.

Control and instrumentation engineers ensure that industrial equipment and machinery work safely and efficiently. They may work in an office, a laboratory, on a factory floor or all three.

Responsibilities typically include:

preparing and agreeing project budgets, timescales and specifications with clients and managers
undertaking relevant research
producing and implementing designs
creating test procedures
testing, evaluating, modifying and calibrating products and instruments
writing reports and documentation
analysing and interpreting data
collaborating with a team of scientists and engineers
providing technical support.
You can find out more about control engineering by reading our control engineering industry sector overview, written by an experienced control engineer.

Typical employers of control and instrumentation engineers
Power generation companies
Manufacturers and installers of instruments and control devices/systems
Process companies
Self-employment via consultancy/contract work is possible for individuals with several years' experience.

Vacancies attract strong competition, particularly opportunities on structured graduate training schemes so it's advisable to apply early. Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in relevant publications including TARGETjobs Engineering, The Engineer, Electronic Engineering Times, Computer Weekly and New Scientist.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both school leavers and graduates. For graduates, a degree in electrical, electronic or mechanical engineering, computing or applied physics is normally necessary. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

A postgraduate qualification can be advantageous and may be necessary for some posts. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate options to explore your options.

If you are aiming to work in a technician role, it is possible to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) or through an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as electronic engineering, electrical engineering, systems engineering or manufacturing engineering. To find out more about getting into engineering via a school leaver route, visit the engineering section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers.

Relevant experience can be beneficial. Some employers offer final year project work, degree sponsorship, vacation work and industrial placements which can provide valuable contacts and a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for control and instrumentation engineers
Employers seek imaginative graduates with good technical knowledge and strong practical abilities. Control and instrumentation engineers must also be:

business-minded
capable of working well within a team
organised
able to work under pressure to meet tight deadlines.