Investment bank corporate financiers provide financial services and advice to commercial and government clients about various financial matters including fund and debt management, mergers, flotations, acquisitions and privatisation.

Corporate financiers are responsible for identifying and securing privatisation, merger and acquisition deals, managing and investing large monetary funds, and buying and selling financial products for their clients.

Typical duties include:

working closely with clients at senior levels
advising about how to meet targets and create investment capital
generating finance from shares and loans
gathering, analysing and interpreting complicated numerical information
assessing and predicting financial risks and returns
using financial modelling to predict outcomes
negotiating and structuring financial details
running transactions
providing investment advice, tactics and recommendations
preparing legal documents and prospectuses
liaising with accountants, lawyers, financial experts and regulatory bodies.
Investment banking provides high levels of responsibility, good promotional opportunities and impressive financial rewards for the most successful employees. However, working hours are usually very long.

Typical employers of corporate financiers
Global investment, corporate, retail and commercial banks
Corporate finance sections of accountancy firms
Private equity fund institutions
Vacancies are advertised by careers services, online, in newspapers including The Financial Times and in publications such as Business Week, Investors Chronicle, The Economist and The Banker. Sector and company research is essential. There are several graduate schemes available with investment banks. Applications should be made as early in the academic year as possible.

Qualifications and training required
While a 2.1 in any subject is acceptable, a business studies, management, finance, mathematics or economics qualification can be helpful. So too can an MBA or similar professional qualification. Relevant work experience is particularly beneficial and interns are often hired for full-time graduate roles.

Key skills for investment bank corporate financiers
Motivation
Ambition
Determination
Adaptability
IT skills
Analytical skills
Teamworking skills
Numerical skills
Problem-solving skills
Communication skills.