Corporate bankers provide advice to commercial and private clients about a variety of financial matters and promote financial services/products, to help these clients run their operations.

Corporate bankers are like retail bankers , but they deal with companies rather than everyday people. Their clients range from small and medium sized companies to huge conglomerates. The products they offer include treasury services, loans and credit, trade finance (such as letters of credit), and employer services (such as payroll).

Corporate bankers are employed by clearing/commercial banks, the Bank of England and other banking sector firms. Their responsibilities include:

meeting with and interviewing corporate and personal customers, discussing their financial requirements, and providing appropriate financial advice
advising corporate clients about mergers, acquisitions, capital markets etc
preparing lending agreements
promoting the bank's services
planning and problem solving
writing reports
managing projects
training and supervising junior banking staff.
A career in banking provides high levels of responsibility, good promotional prospects and impressive financial rewards for the most successful employees. However, in return, very long hours of work and high levels of stress are common. Regular travel, absence from home overnight and overseas work may also be required.

Corporate banking is a popular career choice and graduate vacancies are highly sought after. Most opportunities arise in London and other major UK and international cities. Vacancies are advertised by careers services, on relevant organisations' websites, in specialist graduate careers publications such as TARGETjobs Finance, and in national newspapers, such as Bloomberg, Business Week, The Financial Times, The London Evening Standard, The Economist and The Banker, plus their online equivalents. Undertaking relevant sector/company research, attending presentations and networking are essential.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a good honours degree (min 2.1), preferably in a business-related subject such as economics, business studies, maths or management, to get onto a bank’s graduate scheme.

There are also opportunities for school leavers, who can enter the profession in customer service roles and work up by gaining experience and professional qualifications.

Relevant paid or voluntary experience gained via job shadowing, vacation work and internships is particularly beneficial.

Key skills for corporate bankers
Analytical ability
Numeracy skills
Verbal and written communication skills
Very good interpersonal skills
Negotiation skills
Discretion
Attention to detail
Ability to prioritise, manage time and work under pressure
Willingness to work long and unsocial hours.