Curators are responsible for assembling, cataloguing, managing and presenting/displaying artistic and cultural collections.

Curators are in charge of a collection of exhibits in a museum or art gallery. Their job is to build up collections, often in specialist areas. Curators develop ways in which objects, archives and artworks can be interpreted, through exhibitions, publications, events and audio-visual presentations. Their work involves buying exhibits, organising exhibitions, arranging restoration of artefacts, identifying and recording items, organising loans and dealing with enquiries. All of these tasks require curators to work with colleagues in areas such as conservation, education, design and marketing. In addition, they may conduct research and may lecture on findings or ongoing activities.

Other typical responsibilities of curators include:

developing and organising new collections to expand and improve educational and research facilities
extensively researching, negotiating prices on and buying items such as sculptures, statues and paintings that can add value to the collection
maintaining records and cataloguing acquisitions
researching, compiling and preparing written information about catalogues and publishing it on the institution's website
collaborating with other institutions
ensuring that collections are properly preserved
raising funds and grants
interviewing, hiring and training staff.
Some curators may occasionally have the opportunity to travel, but the work is mainly during the day and in one location. The work of a curator can involve some evening and weekend work.

Typical employers of curators
National museums/galleries
Local authority museums/galleries
Independent museums/galleries
Heritage centres
Qualifications and training required
A good undergraduate degree is usually essential for the majority of curatorial positions. Due to the strong competition in this area, many curators also hold postgraduate degrees or diplomas and have previous experience. You might begin your career in a more junior role such as assistant curator.

This area of work is open to graduates of all disciplines, but particularly relevant subjects include:

anthropology
archaeology
art
art history
arts administration
event/exhibition management
history.
Many (but by no means all) museums and galleries like to recruit staff with postgraduate museum studies, arts administration or similar qualifications. The sector is becoming increasingly professionalised and there are now a number of postgraduate programmes available.

Some museums run volunteer programmes or offer work placements, so anyone interested in following this career should try to spend some time on such a placement. Experience in public relations would be an advantage.

Key skills for curators
Excellent written and verbal communication skills
Ability to organise, present and communicate messages effectively through design
Excellent project management and organisational skills
Knowledge of fundraising for cultural projects
Knowledge of working with museum databases and IT issues
Good teamworking skills
Excellent research and IT skills.