Database administrators are responsible for accurately and securely using, maintaining and developing computerised databases within a wide range of public and private sector organisations.

Database administrators (DBAs) design, write and take care of computer database systems so that the right person can get the information they need at the right time. Responsibilities of the job vary according to employment sector, but typically include:

working with database software to find ways to store, organise and manage data
troubleshooting
keeping databases up to date
helping with database design and development
managing database access
designing maintenance procedures and putting them into operation
ensuring that databases meet user requirements
liaising with programmers, applications/operational staff, IT project managers and other technical staff
managing database security/integrity and backup procedures
implementing security measures
defining objectives through consultation with staff at all levels
writing reports, documentation and operating manuals
testing and modifying databases to ensure that they operate reliably
providing user training, support and feedback
writing disaster recovery plans
archiving data.
This role can involve working to tight deadlines and when necessary, long hours. IT professionals working in this area may also be need to be available for call-outs on evenings and weekends.

Typical employers of database administrators
Financial organisations
IT companies
Management consultancy firms
Software companies
Universities and academic institutions
Hospitals
Local authorities
Central government
Charities
Any organisation that stores large amounts of information and data
Data management and storage is a key focus for many business organisations. Vacancies are advertised online – by employers and on IT jobs boards such as IT Jobs Watch – as well as by recruitment agencies, careers services and by TARGETjobs.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both school leavers and graduates.

It is often possible to enter the profession with a degree or higher national diploma (HND) in any subject. However, a qualification in a relevant subject such as computer science, software engineering, electronic engineering, mathematics or software engineering can be advantageous. For graduates without relevant qualifications or experience, a postgraduate qualification in computing, IT or operational research is beneficial.

Previous work experience is often necessary, and can be gained through IT or technology-related industrial placements, summer internships and insight days.

Key skills for database administrators
Patience
Meticulous attention to detail
A logical approach to work
The ability to prioritise tasks
Problem-solving skills
Good organisational skills
Communication and interpersonal skills
Familiarity with computer operating systems and database technology (design, software and structure)