Dietitians promote good dietary health and treat nutritional problems by providing practical advice about food choices, based on scientific research.

Dietitians work on a group and an individual basis with people of all ages. They work both with people who are sick and people who are well. Responsibilities include:

providing health advice and promoting healthy eating
advising about special diets
making presentations
writing reports
educating health professionals and the public about nutrition
establishing and addressing key health needs
helping to facilitate dietary changes
working as part of a multidisciplinary team
supporting the work of other healthcare professionals
Dieticians may work with people who have been diagnosed with medical conditions such as diabetes or coeliac disease, or provide practical advice to carers.

Typical employers of dietitians
The National Health Service (NHS) employs the majority of dietitians within hospitals, community health organisations and outpatient clinics. Some dietitians are self-employed, while others work for private healthcare sector employers or food, drink and pharmaceutical companies. Dieticians may also work in sport or the media, or in public health policy roles within the government or non-governmental organisations.

Jobs are advertised by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers, in publications such as Network Health Digest and in vacancy lists produced by the British Dietetic Association. Work experience and hospital visits can provide a useful insight into the profession.

Qualifications and training required
All dieticians are registered with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC). The minimum qualification requirement is a BSc Hons in dietetics or a related science degree (such as a life sciences degree that incorporates human physiology and biochemistry) with a postgraduate diploma or higher degree in dietetics.

Key skills for dietitians
Dietitians need to possess a mature, confident and caring manner. The ability to interact well with people from a wide range of backgrounds, together with good interpersonal and communication skills are essential – as is an understanding nature.