Environmental education officers are responsible for promoting environmental conservation and sustainable development via a variety of means, including education, marketing and publicity.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

preparing and distributing publicity materials and displays
writing plans, reports and press releases
producing educational resources
liaising with schools, businesses, LEAs, voluntary/community groups and other local organisations
organising school visits
generating income via fundraising activities, submitting funding bids etc
managing budgets
allocating funding
supervising and training staff/volunteers
analysing data and collating information
attending conferences.
Working with people is a key feature of the job and includes conservation awareness events such as talks, presentations, workshops and guided walks, helping with volunteer activities and conservation projects.

Typical employers of environmental education officers
Employers of environmental education officers include charities, The National Trust, local authorities/LEAs, The Wildlife Trusts, government organisations such as Natural England and conservation groups including The British Trust for Conservation Volunteers and Groundwork UK.

Environmental education is a popular career choice and vacancies attract intense competition. Unpaid opportunities are easier to obtain and greatly outnumber salaried positions (paid vacancies are few and not usually well paid). Vacancies are advertised via the internet, in newspapers, local authority vacancy lists and publications such as New Scientist, Nature, Opportunities and The Environment Post. Many jobs receive little advertising, so networking, job shadowing and speculative applications are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
To become an environmental health officer you will usually need a relevant degree or HND qualification. You may be able to enter the profession without qualifications, but this is rare.

To become an environmental education officer it is usually necessary to possess at least six months prior relevant work experience (paid or voluntary) and an appropriate degree/HND gained in a subject such as education, community studies, countryside management, agricultural science, horticulture, biology, geography, plant sciences/botany, zoology or environmental sciences. In order to enter the profession without qualifications you would need a great deal of appropriate work experience.

Key skills for environmental education officers
Candidates should be computer literate and have excellent interpersonal, organisational and communication skills. A driving licence, first aid and/or health and safety training can be helpful, as can experience of initiating and managing projects, supervising others and organising guided walks and school groups.