Equality and diversity officers aim to reduce workplace discrimination on the grounds of age, disability, gender, race, religion and sexual orientation. Some are generalists while others specialise in a particular area.

Equality and diversity officers work to promote equality and reduce discrimination within workplaces, schools, universities, housing associations, social welfare organisations and the wider community.

Responsibilities of the job include:

running training sessions
maintaining records and information systems
advising about the effects of discrimination on grounds of age, disability, gender, race, religion and sexual orientation
compiling statistics
acting as an advocate for and presenting the needs of members of ethnic minority groups, the LGBTQ+ community, and those affected by age or disability
raising awareness of equality issues and promoting change
preparing/distributing publicity materials and displays
interpreting and ensuring compliance with legislation
preparing and delivering presentations
researching cases.
Referral to and liaising with other relevant organisations (such as community groups) are key features of the work.

To find out more, take a look at our overview of working in the area of diversity/equal opportunities. You can also head to our HR areas of work section to explore other possible specialisms.

Typical employers of equality and diversity officers
The Equality and Human Rights Commission
Professional associations
The Law Society
Schools and universities
The police
Large private sector companies
Local authorities
Trade unions
The Civil Service
Vacancies are advertised in local, regional and national newspapers, Adviser Magazine, AdviceUK’s fortnightly job lists, and by Citizens Advice. Speculative applications to employers are advisable, particularly for work experience placements.

To get you started, take a look at our list of employers who offer HR graduate training schemes.

Qualifications and training required
Many posts will require a degree. Any discipline may be accepted, but the most relevant subjects include law, psychology, business, management, education, social/community work, public administration and sociology/social sciences. A postgraduate degree in equality and diversity, race and ethnic relations and disability studies may be helpful.

Previous relevant work experience is essential prior to entry into the profession. This can be gained by helping in a local advice centre, citizens advice bureau or students' union welfare office. Many equality and diversity officers enter the profession following a career in teaching, law, social work, housing, welfare rights, HR, health or youth/community work.

Membership with the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) offers opportunities for continuing professional development (CPD) and can help to show your commitment to your field. You can become a member by obtaining a CIPD qualification or through experience assessment, where you use your experience from the past three years to gain professional recognition.

To get into this career as a school leaver, the most likely route is to complete an apprenticeship in HR and gain experience before applying for specialist roles. 

Key skills for equality and diversity officers
Good listening skills
The ability to relate to a wide range of people
Verbal and written communication skills
Maturity
Confidence
Open-mindedness
Patience
Negotiation skills.
