Exhibition display designers create innovative and appealing display stands that meet aesthetic, budgetary and practical requirements.

Exhibition display designers design and produce exhibitions for museums, galleries, libraries, private businesses, specialist trade events and conferences, and large commercial public events.

Key responsibilities of the job include:

consulting clients about design requirements
collecting appropriate background and product information
producing realistic but competitive quotes
clarifying design issues
negotiating and agreeing budgets and time-scales
producing sketches and three-dimensional computer generated images
ensuring that projects meet specifications, keep within budget and run to schedule
liaising with suppliers, contractors and specialists, such as lighting technicians
organising and attending meetings
using a variety of media (especially IT and computer-aided design) to generate solutions
delivering final work to clients for review
maintaining awareness of current creative trends and influences
replying to queries from clients
transporting display stands to exhibition venues
erecting and dismantling display stands at locations.
The work can require long hours and having to meet tight deadlines. Travel to exhibition venues within the UK and sometimes abroad, and nights spent away from home, are often necessary.

Typical employers of exhibition display designers
Employment opportunities mostly arise within exhibition display design divisions of general design companies, although there are some specialist companies. Vacancies are advertised by recruitment agencies, online and in local, regional and national newspapers. Freelance work or self-employment are alternative options, although they necessitate having substantial experience and a good network of contacts.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into exhibition display designing for both university graduates and school leavers.

Employers may favour those possessing exhibition design, art, design technology, architecture or interior design degrees.

Gaining experience via job shadowing, placements or vacation work is helpful. Candidates could also volunteer, helping with exhibitions in local museums and libraries, and should put together a portfolio of work to show employers.

Key skills for exhibition display designers
Technical drawing skills and IT skills, particularly computer-aided design
Creativity and imagination
Commercial awareness and marketing skills
Excellent organisation and project/time management skills
Communication and teamworking skills.
