Exploration geologists use geophysical techniques, such as seismic and electromagnetic methods, to forecast where mineral deposits may be located for extraction purposes.

Exploration geologists are responsible for identifying and assessing the location, quantity and quality of mineral deposits. Their work can be office based, although fieldwork is necessary to collect and test site/borehole samples.

Typical duties include:

investigating the structure and evolution of the earth and its natural resources
planning programmes for exploration of sites for oil, gas, water, minerals, etc
surveying and mapping geologically promising sites
collecting and recording samples and data from test sites
analysing geological data using specialist computer applications
ascertaining extraction risks
preparing reports
advising managerial, technical and engineering staff on the development of reserves
Absence from home for long periods of time is common as international work is often necessary. Long hours, shift and weekend work are also regularly required.

Typical employers
Exploration geologists are typically employed by organisations working within the minerals extraction industry, oil companies, contractors, the British Geological Survey (part of the National Environment Research Council) and consultancies. Some exploration geologists may work as self-employed consultants.

Although there are a small number of UK-based companies working in this area (predominantly within North Sea oil and gas extraction), most opportunities arise overseas.

There is strong competition for vacancies, so relevant geological experience gained via vacation placements or working in junior positions can be useful. Jobs are advertised in national newspapers, online and by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies. Useful websites for information include The Geological Society and The Geologist's Directory.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
To become an exploration geologist, you must have a degree in a relevant subject such as geology, geophysics, geosciences or earth science. Some employers also expect a relevant postgraduate qualification in a specific area of geology or geoscience, such as hydrogeology or petroleum geoscience. 

The job carries a high level of responsibility, as the employee must ensure the accuracy of forecasts – initiating extraction processes is often very expensive and mistakes can be costly. Consequently, training is an important feature of the job. Once you have sufficient qualifications and experience, you can apply for chartered geologist status with the Geological Society. This provides opportunities for continuing professional development and will help to keep your knowledge up to date.

Key skills for exploration geologists
Knowledge of a range of sciences and their applications
Ability to work within a multidisciplinary team of scientists and engineers
Good organisational skills
Computer literacy and the ability to analyse numerical and graphical data
Good written and verbal communication skills