Fitness centre managers are responsible for every aspect of the day-to-day management of centres dedicated to physical fitness.

Employers of fitness centre managers include health authorities, private fitness clubs, hotel and leisure groups, educational institutions and corporate fitness centres. Fitness centre managers undertake similar duties to managers of recreation and leisure centres, with responsibilities including:

recruiting, training and supervising staff
managing budgets
enhancing profitability by organising and delivering an appropriate range of fitness activities and programmes
keeping statistical and financial records
maintaining fitness equipment
ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation
maintaining customer service standards
undertaking administrative tasks
promoting and marketing the business
dealing with enquiries, complaints and emergencies.
The amount of contact with customers and staff varies according to the size of employer: managers in larger organisations may be mostly office based, whereas those employed by smaller establishments often have frequent contact with customers, suppliers and employees. The work can require regular long hours, evening, weekend and public holiday work.

Opportunities are advertised both online and in print in local, regional and national newspapers; in specialist publications including Leisure Management and Leisure Week, on the Opportunities website, which focuses on the public sector, and in vacancy lists produced by the Chartered Institute for the Management of Sport and Physical Activity (CIMPSA).

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both university graduates and school leavers.

Employers may prefer graduates with qualifications in sports science, recreation or leisure studies, health management, physiology, life sciences, business or management. A relevant postgraduate qualification (for example an MSc in sports science) can be useful, particularly for graduates without appropriate first degrees.

Related work experience is normally necessary. This can be gained via part-time or seasonal work as a coach, fitness instructor, recreation assistant or leisure/fitness centre attendant.

Key skills for fitness centre managers
Candidates must be physically fit and should possess sound customer service, business, management, sales and marketing skills. Good problem solving, interpersonal, organisational and communication skills are also essential. First aid qualifications are beneficial for most positions.