Government research officers undertake research and evaluation activities that provide government departments and local authorities with evidence required for the formulation, implementation and evaluation of policies.

Government research officers work for the departments of central government and within local authority housing, economic, environment, development departments etc. Primary responsibilities of the job include:

writing research specifications
agreeing project requirements, objectives and research reference terms
searching for and retrieving information from paper-based sources, the internet and online databases
interviewing members of the public
using a variety of qualitative and quantitative research methods
analysing data
making conference presentations
liaising with policy customers and external researchers
supervising, tutoring and acting as a mentor to junior/external researchers
making sure that agreed project deadlines are met
writing/editing draft questionnaires and reports
keeping up-to-date with research/policy developments
writing speeches, articles, policy papers and party briefs
liaising with, advising and answering enquiries from MPs, related agencies, parliamentary advisers, members of the public, academics and local council
Government departments typically recruit independently on an ad hoc basis. Opportunities are advertised online, in national newspapers and their websites, and on the online jobs boards of the Social Research Association and the Civil Service.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into becoming a government research officer for both graduates and school leavers.

Graduates should have a minimum 2.1 honours degree in a subject including substantial social research such as sociology, criminology, geography, political science, psychology, politics, human geography, statistics and economics. For graduates without relevant degrees, a postgraduate qualification may be beneficial. Graduates from a range of degree disciplines can also apply through the Civil Service fast stream to go into a number of government departments – check individual schemes for the specific entry requirements needed.

Key skills for government research officers
Employers seek motivated individuals with good research, information, organisational, numerical, analytical, communication, interpersonal and teamwork skills. Knowledge and experience of social research methods, statistical techniques, social policy and specialist computer software including databases is usually required. Potential employees should be capable of dealing confidently with people in important and influential positions.