Health promotion specialists may work in the community, promoting good health, or in strategic work, developing health policies.

Some health promotion specialists have skills in specific areas including drink and drug abuse, smoking or teenage pregnancy. Others may work with particular client groups such as the elderly or people with disabilities. Alternatively, they may have a general remit. Responsibilities typically include:

designing, managing and promoting health improvement programmes
raising awareness of good health, diet and exercise through training and workshops
giving advice to members of a particular community or social group
devising health policies and schemes for assessing health needs
liaising with, supporting the work of and providing expert advice to other voluntary, charity and statutory organisations
managing projects
keeping up to date with current health promotion trends
supplying other organisations with specialist information and resources
making presentations
writing reports
campaigning for the adoption and/or enhancement of national health promotion and preventative policies and measures
Typical employers of health promotion specialists
The NHS employs most health promotion specialists. Other employers include local authorities, voluntary and charitable organisations, health boards and national health and voluntary sector agencies.

Vacancies attract moderate competition. Jobs are advertised online (particularly on the NHS website), in newspapers, in publications such as Nursing Times (both online and in print); and in vacancy lists produced by NHS trusts and local authorities.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into health promotion for both graduates and school leavers.

For graduates, a good degree in any biological, psychological or social science is acceptable, although employers prefer graduates with additional qualifications in health promotion, health studies, nursing, public and environmental health or education. A postgraduate qualification in public health or health promotion is advantageous – particularly for candidates without a relevant first degree. Previous paid or voluntary work experience gained in any role with a health promotion remit is highly recommended.

Key skills for health promotion specialists
Candidates should have a mature, non-judgemental, confident and caring manner. The ability to interact well with people from a wide range of backgrounds, together with good problem solving and project/time management skills are essential. Excellent communication skills are vital, as is the ability to motivate others.