Hotel managers are responsible for managing employees and for planning, marketing , coordinating and administering hotel services such as catering and accommodation facilities.

Specific duties and the amount of customer or staff contact vary according to the size of employer: hotel managers in larger organisations may be mostly office-based, whereas managers of smaller establishments often have frequent contact with both customers and employees. Typical responsibilities include:

recruiting, training and supervising staff
managing budgets
maintaining statistical and financial records
planning maintenance work, events and room bookings
handling customer complaints and queries
promoting and marketing the business
ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation and licensing laws.
Rapid career progression into higher managerial roles is possible both within the UK and overseas. Promotional opportunities are generally best for employees who are willing or able to change job location, to specialise in one area such as marketing, sales or human resources, or to move into related areas of employment.

Typical employers of hotel managers
Hotel chains
Independent hotels and motels
Residential clubs
Resorts
Inns
Hotel and leisure groups
Vacancies are advertised by recruitment agencies, in local and national newspapers and in publications including Hotel Business, The Caterer and their respective websites. Several large hotel chains also run graduate management schemes.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both university graduates and school leavers.

A hotel/catering management or hospitality qualification can be advantageous. Graduates without relevant degrees could obtain a postgraduate diploma in hotel management or build up an extensive amount of experience. A management, languages, leisure, business studies, travel or tourism degree may also be helpful.

Relevant work experience is essential for entry into the profession; this can include hotel, catering, retailing, waitressing or bar work.

Key skills for hotel managers
Reliability and stamina are essential in hotel management. You will also need excellent numerical, verbal and written communication skills. Numeracy is particularly important for finance-related and office-based roles, while good interpersonal skills and customer service are vital for roles involving contact with clients. Knowledge of foreign languages can be an advantage.