Information scientists are responsible for managing the acquisition, supply and distribution of information within an organisation or section of an organisation and for making that information accessible to users.

Information scientists typically work across the breadth of a company. A lot of their time is spent communicating with colleagues or carrying out research in archives of documents.

Key duties of the job include:

evaluating, organising, cataloguing, classifying, managing and distributing information in a variety of formats
creating databases
ensuring that information is up to date
ensuring that data protection laws are met
helping to develop intranets for staff to use
answering Freedom of Information (FOI) requests
carrying out information audits, inquiries and internal commissions
answering enquiries from staff and external parties
maintaining statistical and financial records
writing reports
using specialist computer applications
searching for and retrieving information from the internet and online databases
promoting and marketing services
maintaining a budget
training and supervising assistant staff.
Typical employers of information scientists
Private and public sector organisations
Public libraries and information services
Government departments
Professional associations
Research establishments
Charities
Academic or school libraries
Commercial organisations
Universities
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies and in local/national newspapers. Early applications for traineeships and postgraduate courses (particularly where funding is sought) are essential.

Qualifications and training required
It’s possible to enter this profession with a degree in any subject. However, some employers require a relevant subject such as information science or information and library studies.

Depending on the industry you work in, you may need a sector-specific degree. For example, if you are managing history databases, a history degree may be preferable.

Many employers ask for an undergraduate or postgraduate degree accredited by the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP). A list of accredited qualifications is available on CILIP’s website.

Any experience of working in a library, archive or research facility is beneficial. You can also apply for IT, technology or administration-related industrial placements, summer internships and insight programmes.

If you are a school leaver (or a graduate) who has been working in a library, you can apply to CILIP for certification. This will be awarded in recognition of the knowledge and skills that you have developed in your role. To get certified, you will need to complete various activities to demonstrate your continuing professional development (CPD) and submit an electronic portfolio.

Key skills for information scientists
Motivation
Excellent research skills
Attention to detail
Organisation and efficiency
Teamworking skills
Verbal and written communication
Interpersonal skills
Computer skills
Proficiency with databases and the internet