IT and software trainers teach desktop applications and software to a range of clients, from business people to the unemployed.

Responsibilities of the job vary according to the type of employer and how it makes use of IT. However, typical duties include:

assessing individual/group training needs
planning, preparing and researching lessons
teaching IT staff to use various computer languages and specialist applications
teaching general staff to use desktop programmes such as Microsoft Office and other office software
organising and promoting courses
developing and delivering programmes of learning activities
preparing teaching materials
spending contact time with students on an individual or group basis
invigilating examinations
checking and assessing students' work and giving feedback
liaising with other organisations and employers
making use of new technology such as distance learning or video conferencing
keeping IT skills and knowledge up to date.
You may have to travel as part of the work, especially when employed by a specialist training provider or international organisation.

Typical employers of IT and software trainers
Private, public and voluntary sector organisations
Adult and further education colleges and universities
Software companies
Specialist IT training providers
Banks and accountancy firms
Freelance work/self-employment is an option for people with sufficient experience.

Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies and in newspapers and professional journals including Computing and Computing Weekly, as well as their online counterparts. Speculative applications are advisable. 

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both school leavers and graduates.

It is possible to enter this career with a degree or higher national diploma (HND) in any subject. However, some employers prefer graduates with qualifications in relevant subjects such as computing, computer science, IT, software engineering, business studies and management.

Previous relevant computing, software or training experience (perhaps gained through industrial placements or summer internships) is normally essential, although personality and aptitude may be regarded as being equally important. Teaching and training qualifications can also be advantageous.

It is sometimes possible to enter this career without a degree or HND. 

Key skills
Excellent oral and written communication
Administrative skills
Management and leadership skills
Organisation and efficiency
Analytical and technical skills
The ability to motivate others
A patient and friendly approach to teaching