Insurance claims inspectors work on behalf of insurance companies to determine the level and validity of insurance policy claims.

Inspectors are responsible for assessing or determining liability, negotiating payments and minimising the number of fraudulent claims. They investigate insurance claims relating to, for example, burglary, motor vehicle accidents, flooding or fire damage to property and in some cases, workplace accidents or work-related illnesses.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

offering advice about making claims
tracking claims through to completion or settlement
verifying details with witnesses and insurance policy holders
visiting accident/loss scenes such as residential properties and workplaces
liaising with a range of professionals including the police, medical staff, solicitors and loss adjusters
negotiating settlements with claimants or lawyers
carrying out background research and gathering information
writing reports and completing paperwork
organising payments
Typical employers of insurance claims inspectors
Insurance claims inspectors are employed by insurance and reinsurance companies and brokers.

Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services, in local and national newspapers and specialist publications such as Insurance Times and Insurance Post, plus their online equivalents. Vacancies attract strong competition, so early applications are recommended.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a career in insurance claims inspecting for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates can join the graduate schemes of large insurance firms, and can have a degree in any discipline, although some employers prefer a qualification in mathematics, economics, law, management, business studies, accountancy or finance. Relevant claims experience gained via internships and placements can be beneficial.

School leavers are taken on as trainees and can move directly into claims work after their training period is completed. You can also enter a firm in a junior role and work your way up, or alternatively undertake an apprenticeship. 

Key skills for insurance claims inspectors
Analytical skills
Problem-solving skills
Organisation
Confidence
Adaptability
Decision-making and good judgement
Numerical skills
Interpersonal skills
Good verbal and written communication skills