IT support analysts (also known as helpdesk analysts or technical support analysts) provide technical support and advice to IT users.

Technical support (or IT support) professionals help resolve customers’ technical problems via email, phone, social media and in person.

Professionals in this area either work in-house (providing support within a particular organisation) or provide support and services to other businesses, to customers of a particular product, or on an ad hoc basis. For example, there is a growing market for on-demand services for home and office tech repair, set-up and troubleshooting. Companies providing this service dispatch their support analysts when summoned to fix anything from a cracked iPhone screen to a tricky installation or a laptop riddled with malware.

Typical duties include:

logging and processing support calls
installing and configuring computer hardware, software, systems, networks, printers and scanners
planning and undertaking scheduled maintenance upgrades
setting up accounts for staff, ensuring that they know how to log in
solving password problems
talking to clients and computer users to determine the nature of any problems they encounter
responding to breakdowns
investigating, diagnosing and solving computer software and hardware faults
repairing equipment and replacing parts
supervising junior engineering and technical staff
obtaining replacement or specialist components, fixtures or fittings
checking computer equipment for electrical safety
maintaining records of software licences
managing stocks of equipment, consumables and other supplies
Typical employers of IT support analysts
Banks and financial service companies
Manufacturing firms and service areas
Schools, colleges and universities
Public sector organisations, such as the NHS and local authorities
Electronics retailers
Software retailers
Almost all SMEs and larger companies recruit IT support staff to assist employees
Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and by recruitment agencies.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
Both university graduates and school leavers can enter the IT support or helpdesk profession. Whether you have a degree or not, you will need to demonstrate an interest in fixing technical problems, either through previous work experience or activities you have completed in your own time.

While open to graduates of any discipline, technical support employers typically prefer graduates with an IT-related qualification.

It is often possible to enter this career without a degree. Apprenticeships are available in IT support, sometimes requiring GCSEs only. 

Many IT support analysts advance their careers by broadening their skills within a specific industry or area. Large companies with an extensive technical infrastructure may have separate teams dealing with different areas of their business. With experience, a move to a specialist area dealing with more complex technical environments is possible. Another option is to take on the role of team or section leader.

Key skills for IT support/helpdesk
In-depth knowledge of hardware and software
Up-to-date knowledge of the latest IT and software trends
Strong customer service ethos
Ability to work well with people
Strong communications skills
Excellent organisational skills
Ability to quickly establish good working relationships with clients
Willingness to sometimes work unsociable hours
Patience
A logical mind
Enthusiasm for continual learning