Journalists research, write, edit, proofread and file news stories, features and articles for use on television and radio or within magazines, journals and newspapers, in print and online.

Journalists write and assemble together news stories that will interest their audience. By gathering together a number of different sources and ensuring that all the arguments are represented, they keep their audience abreast of events in their world.

The job typically involves:

reading press releases
researching articles
establishing and maintaining contacts
interviewing sources
writing, editing, and submitting copy
attending events
proofreading
verifying statements and facts
staying up to date with privacy, contempt and defamation law
liaising with editors, sub–editors, designers and photographers.
It is possible to transfer between television, radio, newspaper and publishing work.

Typical employers of journalists
Newspapers
Magazines
Newswires
Websites
Radio stations
Television companies
Periodical publishers
Many journalists work freelance. However, to do so you will need a network of industry contacts, the ability to propose strong pitches and a reputation for reliability.

Vacancies are advertised online, in Campaign, Press Gazette, Broadcast and The Bookseller. Many jobs receive little advertising, so networking, internships and speculative applications (including samples of published work) are advisable.

Some employers, including periodical publishers, the BBC and ITN, operate graduate trainee schemes - early applications for such schemes are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
Although there are routes into journalism for both university graduates and school leavers, some organisations and newspapers now ask for a degree. While any subject is acceptable, English or journalism are preferred. Specialist subjects such as economics, languages or sciences can be a great advantage.

Some jobs may require a qualification accredited by the National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ). Relevant work experience is also essential and can be gained through published articles, freelance work, writing competitions or voluntary work.

A full, clean driving licence is often a requirement.

Key skills for journalists
Enthusiasm
Stamina
Determination
Confidence
Perseverance
Excellent oral or written skills
Interpersonal skills