Land-based engineers generate solutions to engineering problems within the fields of forestry, horticulture, agriculture, food processing and the environment.

Land-based engineers combine their technical ability with scientific knowledge to solve problems.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

designing and testing agricultural equipment including sprayers and ploughs
designing and producing agricultural vehicles such as harvesters, tractors and loaders
providing advice about soil conservation methods
undertaking environmental impact assessments to determine the effect developments would have on the environment
producing designs for and managing the construction of farm buildings
working in emergency situations to restore water or electricity supplies following natural or human disasters
designing, planning and overseeing the construction of irrigation and drainage systems
writing and presenting reports
carrying out relevant research
giving technical support to customers and dealers
providing consultancy services
Typical employers of land-based engineers
Machinery dealerships
Machinery manufacturers
Government departments
Universities
Agricultural or environmental consultancies.
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies, in local/national newspapers and publications including Farmers’ Weekly, Farmers Guardian, The Engineer and Engineering, plus their respective websites. There are sometimes openings for work overseas, although substantial relevant experience may be necessary and some vacancies are only temporary.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant subject such as environmental engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering or electronic engineering. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

If you are aiming to work in a technician role, it is possible to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND) or an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as land-based engineering. 

Practical skills and experience are equally as important as academic qualifications. Relevant experience is beneficial and can be gained via placements, vacation work and gap years. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree with honours in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the the Institution of Agricultural Engineers (IAgrE). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for land-based engineers
Initiative
Flexibility
Ingenuity
Good communication skills
Technical skills
Analytical skills
Problem-solving skills
IT skills
Ability to work well within a team