Logistics managers or distribution managers are responsible for coordinating the storage, transportation and delivery of goods.

A logistics or distribution manager’s key task is to organise the safe and efficient storage and distribution of goods, and to ensure that orders are fulfilled (carried out) correctly.

Other responsibilities include:

organising shipments
coordinating drivers, vehicles, loads and journeys
operating IT systems
negotiating and agreeing contracts
developing and confirming schedules
planning for and negotiating technical difficulties
preparing paperwork for regulatory bodies
liaising with and managing staff and shifts
waste management
monitoring stock
ensuring health and safety standards are met
Working hours can vary depending on the industry and the type of employer. Some jobs can require working evenings and weekends, and others involve shift work and on-call duties.

Typical employers of logistics and distribution managers
Specialist distribution companies
Manufacturers
The armed forces
Major commercial organisations
Retailers
Vacancies are advertised by TARGETjobs, careers services and occasionally recruitment agencies, or in national newspapers and specialist publications such as Logistics and Transport Focus and Logistics and Supply Chain and their respective websites. Professional bodies, such as the Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport (CILT), often have jobs boards on their websites too.

Qualifications and training required
Both graduates and school leavers can become logistics or distribution managers. Various large organisations such as Royal Mail and DHL run graduate schemes with a logistics or supply chain stream. These roles are likely to involve a heavy element of management, whether that’s managing a warehouse shift, stock taking, or a fleet of vehicles. Often graduates of any subject can apply but sometimes business- or logistics-related degrees are preferred by recruiters.

An apprenticeship is another way into a logistics career but are unlikely to include positions of management straight away.  Employers may also advertise apprenticeships on their websites or in the local press.

Graduates and apprentices will not be expected to hold any logistics management qualifications, but are likely to be expected to obtain them as their career progresses. As well as management, qualifications could cover health and safety, forklift driving or construction site skills, for example.

Key skills for logistics and distribution managers
Teamwork skills
Managerial skills
The ability to motivate others
Interpersonal skills
Logical reasoning
Numeracy skills
IT skills
The ability to plan ahead and deal with unexpected changes