Manufacturing engineers are responsible for the technical management, maintenance and development of new and existing production lines.

Manufacturing engineers work to improve the process of making products such as food and drink, plastics and pharmaceuticals.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

designing new equipment, processes, procedures and systems
purchasing and installing equipment
repairing equipment
responding to breakdowns
investigating production problems
making improvements to current operations to enhance efficiency
supervising engineering and technical staff
managing budgets
maintaining statistical and financial records
diagnosing faults
planning and organising maintenance
liaising with suppliers, customers and research and development staff.
Shift and ‘on-call' work may be required, particularly where manufacturing equipment is in continual 24-hour operation. Career progression often happens through moves into managerial positions or related areas of employment such as plant/production engineering.

You can find out more about manufacturing engineering by reading our manufacturing industry sector overview.

Typical employers of manufacturing engineers
Manufacturing engineers are employed by production and process companies such as food, drink and car manufacturers.

Vacancies are advertised by careers services and recruitment agencies, in local and national newspapers and in a number of technical and manufacturing journals such as TARGETjobs Engineering, The Engineer, Manufacturing Engineering and their respective websites.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both school leavers and university graduates. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant subject such as manufacturing, mechanical, electrical or electronic engineering. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website.

If you are a school leaver, you may be able to enter the profession as a trainee with a higher national diploma (HND) or an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as manufacturing or mechanical engineering. 

You can gain useful experience and insights into the profession through presentations, degree sponsorship, vacation work and industrial placements. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for manufacturing engineers
Commercial awareness
The ability to work well under pressure
Problem-solving skills
Teamworking skills
Relevant technical knowledge
Good leadership skills
IT skills
Analytical skills.
