Marine scientists research the sea and study its interactions with its organisms, sea floors, coastal areas and the atmosphere.

Marine scientists may work in the field, in an office setting or on a sea vessel such as a floating laboratory.

Typical responsibilities include:

planning and undertaking laboratory-based experiments and research
collecting samples at sea
keeping up to date with scientific and research developments
attending relevant training courses
recording, analysing and interpreting data from biological or physical processes
using tracking technology to study particular organisms
writing research papers, reports and reviews
ensuring that data is recorded accurately
using problem-solving skills to develop solutions to research challenges
using computer databases and software to analyse and manage data
developing and maintaining a network of contacts
making presentations
identifying new funding sources and applying for grants
planning and organising field research trips
generating new research hypotheses and theories
testing out theories and hypotheses
Typical employers of marine scientists
Marine laboratories
Universities
Government agencies
Oil and gas prospectors and renewable energy companies
Specialist research organisations and consultancies
Engineering companies
Fisheries
Marine conservation groups
Coastal management organisations
Job vacancies are advertised online, by careers services, in national newspapers, in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist, The Marine Biologist, Marine Science and Technology, journals published by the professional institutions and their respective websites. The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) funds a number of undergraduate research experience placements and postgraduate studentships each year – further details are provided on the NERC website.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
A good degree in a subject such as marine science, marine biology, geology, ecology, biology, oceanography, zoology or marine or maritime studies is usually necessary. A relevant postgraduate qualification (whether a PhD or a research-based MSc) is also helpful, particularly for permanent positions. Postdoctoral research, practical research or laboratory work experience is beneficial, and generally required for academic posts. 

Practical skills such as boat handling, scuba diving, first aid and engine maintenance may also prove advantageous.

Key skills for marine scientists
Patience and determination
Creativity and flexibility
A logical and scientific mind
Numerical ability
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent analytical skills
Teamworking and interpersonal skills
Communication skills
A basic understanding of oceanography
The ability to draw conclusions from findings