Direct marketing account managers liaise with clients, suppliers and agency staff in the administration of campaigns and the co-ordination of associated work.

Direct marketing strategies are used to create one-to-one promotional and sales relationships between advertisers and targeted groups of customers who are contacted via email, social media, the internet, telemarketing, direct mail, or advertising campaigns.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

consulting clients about campaign requirements and objectives
formulating strategies
passing proposals on
agreeing timescales and budgets
supervising staff
monitoring and chasing work progress
writing reports
analysing, interpreting and presenting results
delivering ideas and final products to clients for review
financial administration
delivering presentations
The work offers high levels of responsibility and excellent opportunities for promotion into consultant or senior managerial positions. Tight client deadlines require an ability to work under pressure but this can also provide a real buzz to the working day.

Typical employers of account managers
Direct marketing consultancies and agencies
Marketing departments
Major commercial organisations
Jobs are advertised by TARGETjobs, online, by recruitment agencies and in national newspapers and publications including Direct Marketing News, Direct Response, Campaign, Media Week, Precision Marketing, The Drum, Marketing, Marketing Week and their respective websites. Many jobs receive little advertising, so speculative applications are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into marketing for both university graduates and school leavers.

Any degree discipline is acceptable, although some employers prefer a social or behavioural science, business, management, marketing, public relations, languages or numerate subject.

A number of institutions offer specialist postgraduate marketing qualifications, which can be advantageous.

Relevant experience gained within direct marketing or commercial areas such as retail, sales and marketing can also be beneficial.

Key skills for account managers
Commercial awareness
Ability to work under pressure
Excellent analytical skills
Organisational skills
Interpersonal skills
Numerical skills
Verbal communication skills