Materials engineers use their expertise to produce specifications for, design, process and apply materials effectively.

Materials engineers are specialists in the science and engineering of materials.

Job responsibilities vary according to the size and type of employer. However, duties typically include:

developing, modifying, testing and evaluating materials
providing technical advice about the suitability of materials
diagnosing faults
advising on, planning and organising inspections, maintenance and repairs
overseeing operational quality control processes
liaising with suppliers, customers and manufacturing/development staff
supervising engineering and technical staff
undertaking relevant research
You can find out more about materials engineeringing by reading our materials and metals sector overview, written by an experienced materials engineer.

Typical employers of materials engineers
Metal/materials production, manufacturing and process companies
Research and development organisations
Utilities companies
Oil and gas companies
The Civil Service
Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and in relevant publications including TARGETjobs Engineering, Welding and Cutting, The Engineer, Engineering, Engineering News and their respective websites.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
To find out how much money you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both school leavers and university graduates. Graduates will need a degree in a relevant engineering or science-based subject, such as materials engineering, mining engineering, mechanical engineering, materials science, or metallurgy. Some employers will ask for a 2.1 degree but others will accept candidates with a 2.2 degree. Take a look at our list of engineering employers that accept 2.2 degrees.

Postgraduate qualifications can be beneficial (particularly for graduates without relevant backgrounds) and may be necessary for some posts. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website and you can read our article on engineering postgraduate study to explore your options.

If you are a school leaver, you may be able to enter the profession with a higher national diploma (HND); however, career progression may be limited. If you are aiming for a technician role, you can achieve this with an advanced or higher apprenticeship in an appropriate subject such as materials, manufacturing or mechanical engineering. 

Relevant experience can be helpful; many employers offer final year project work, degree sponsorship, vacation work and industrial placements which can provide a useful insight into the profession. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for materials engineers
Sound scientific and technical knowledge
Analytical skills
Confidence
Leadership skills
Effective organisational skills
Communication and interpersonal skills
Commercial awareness
Teamworking skills