Media buyers negotiate the price of and purchase television and radio air time, and advertising space within newspapers, magazines and other print publications.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

negotiating the best price, quality and placement of advertisements
keeping up to date with fluctuations in popularity ratings and developments in the industry
maintaining good relationships with media sales staff
securing the best airtime slots
managing media bookings
Advertising costs are rarely constant, particularly for television broadcasts where prices are related to viewing figures.

Typical employers of media buyers
Some advertising agencies operate graduate recruitment schemes (contact your careers service for details). A small number of agencies offer vacation placements. There are also student programmes launched by the IPA; for example, AdMission provides a ten week paid placement for STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and BAME (black, Asian and minority ethnic) graduates and final year students.

Publications that advertise vacancies include national newspapers, Campaign, The Drum, Marketing, Media Week, Marketing Week and their respective websites. Many posts are never advertised, so speculative applications are essential – Advertisers Annual and BRAD Advertiser may be useful for these.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into media buying for both university graduates and school leavers.

Any degree discipline is acceptable, although journalism, psychology, business studies, public relations, media studies, marketing or management qualifications can be particularly helpful.

A good appreciation of what working within advertising involves is helpful, making relevant paid or voluntary work experience desirable.

Key skills for media buyers
Confidence
Working well under pressure
Good numerical and data management skills
Effective organisational abilities
Good verbal communication skills
Ability to quickly assimilate large amounts of information
Decisiveness