Midwives deliver babies and provide antenatal and postnatal advice, care and support to women, their babies, their partners and families.

Midwives support women and their families through pregnancy and labour and in the time immediately after birth. They work in a range of settings, including hospitals, midwifery-led maternity units and expectant mothers' homes, and are part of a team of professional and medical staff that includes doctors, social workers, neonatal nurses and health visitors. They may be assisted by maternity support workers and be responsible for supervising them.

Typical duties include:

examining and monitoring pregnant women
assessing care requirements and writing care plans
undertaking antenatal care in hospitals, homes and GP practices
carrying out screening tests
providing information, emotional support and reassurance to women and their partners
taking patient samples, pulses, temperatures and blood pressures
caring for and assisting women in labour
monitoring and administering medication, injections and intravenous infusions during labour
monitoring the foetus during labour
advising about and supporting parents in the daily care of their newborn babies
helping parents to cope with miscarriage, termination, stillbirth and neonatal death
writing records
tutoring student midwives
identifying high-risk pregnancies
Midwives may work on a rota and be on call to provide care on a 24-hour basis.

Typical employers of midwives
National Health Service (NHS)
GP practices
Private hospitals
The armed forces
Independent practices
Vacancies appear online, in newspapers, on the NHS jobs website and in publications such as Nursing Times and Nursing Standard.

Qualifications and training required
You can only become a midwife with an approved midwifery degree that leads to registration with the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC). You apply for full-time midwifery degree courses through UCAS and are likely to need at least two (usually three) A levels or equivalent level 3 qualifications. Preferred subjects may include biology or a social science. Courses last for three years and include a mix of university study and practical experience.

Candidates who are already registered as adult nurses can qualify as midwives through an 18-month short programme.

Key skills for midwives
Ability to deal with emotionally charged situations
Excellent teamworking skills
Interpersonal and communication skills
Strong observational skills
An interest in the process of pregnancy and birth
Flexible and adaptable
Able to work with people from different backgrounds
Able to follow instructions and procedures
Caring and patient