Multimedia specialists design and create information technology based multimedia products such as websites, DVDs, and computer games that combine text with sounds, pictures, graphics, video-clips, virtual reality and digital animation.

Key responsibilities of the job include:

meeting and liaising with clients to discuss briefs, requirements and project progress
making technical recommendations
producing, demonstrating and receiving feedback about ideas
creating multimedia designs in liaison with animators, programmers, writers, video producers, sound engineers and artists
developing and using skills and expertise in appropriate design packages such as Photoshop, In Design and After Effects
keeping up-to-date with technological and software developments
testing products for errors and making amendments.
There can be some pressure to meet deadlines, when extra hours may be required. Promotional prospects are excellent for employees willing to change job regularly and to move into managerial positions.

Typical employers of multimedia specialists
Retailers
Software/multimedia houses
Central government
Charities
Telecommunications companies
Advertising agencies
Local authorities
Engineering firms
IT consultancies
Computer games companies
Insurance brokers
Manufacturers
Publishers
Educational organisations
They also work for large corporate organisations with in-house websites, multimedia and new media departments.

Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and trade publications including Computing, Marketing Week, Campaign, Computer Weekly and their respective websites.

Relevant experience from paid or voluntary placements or vacation work is desirable, together with familiarity with a range of computer design packages. It is also helpful to provide employers with links to, or samples of, multimedia products that you have designed.

Qualifications and training required
Although you don’t technically need a degree for entry into this profession, it is unusual for applicants to be successful without one.

A degree or HND in any subject is acceptable for entry, although employers often prefer candidates with technical or creative qualifications such as graphic design, 3-D design, illustration, multimedia technology, IT, business information systems and computer science.

Key skills for multimedia specialists
Confidence
A good eye for design, layout and detail
Imagination and creativity
Patience
Time management skills
Organisational skills
Analytical skills
Problem-solving skills
Communication skills