Multimedia programmers are responsible for designing and creating multimedia computer products that combine text with sounds, pictures, graphics, video clips, virtual reality, digital animation and other forms of media.

A multimedia programmer creates products to be used online and on a variety of other platforms, including DVDs, mobile phones and computer games.

Typical responsibilities include:

creating multimedia product designs using specialist software
meeting and liaising with clients and managers to discuss requirements or project progress
writing code to programme functions, graphics, sounds and digital animation

testing applications and fixing any problems that arise
producing, demonstrating and receiving feedback about products
keeping up to date with technological and software developments
developing skills and expertise in appropriate software and programming languages
producing products that are user-friendly, effective and appealing
working as part of a multi-disciplinary team.
There can be some pressure to meet deadlines, when extra hours may be required. Promotional prospects can be excellent for employees willing to change jobs regularly and to move into managerial positions.

Typical employers of multimedia programmers
Software and multimedia companies
Computer games companies
Advertising and marketing companies
Broadcasters
Specialist multimedia and web design companies
IT consultancies
Large organisations with in-house web development teams, multimedia and new media departments
Vacancies are advertised online, by careers services and recruitment agencies, in newspapers and publications such as Computing, Computer Weekly, Edge and their respective websites. Speculative applications are advisable.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both school leavers and graduates.

It is occasionally possible to enter the profession with a degree or higher national diploma (HND) in any subject. However, many employers prefer graduates with technical or creative qualifications. Relevant subjects include multimedia technology, web design, graphic design, 3D design, game design, animation, fine art, software engineering, IT and computer science. A postgraduate multimedia course can also be helpful, especially for graduates without relevant degrees.

It’s possible to enter this career without a degree or HND; however, this is more difficult and you may have to work your way up from a more junior position. Exact requirements vary from employer to employer, but candidates should have a good portfolio of web pages and other digital designs to demonstrate their technical and creative abilities. 

Key skills for multimedia programmers
Enthusiasm
Imagination and creativity
Patience
Attention to detail
Good analytical and technical skills
Communication skills
Teamworking skills
The ability to work under pressure to meet deadlines