Museum/gallery exhibition officers are responsible for planning and organising permanent or travelling exhibitions, publicity events and promotional activities such as talks and workshops.

Key duties of the job include:

identifying and negotiating the acquisition of items for loan or purchase
preparing and distributing publicity materials and displays
managing staff and budgets
generating income via fundraising activities
writing plans and reports
liaising with schools, voluntary or local history groups and community organisations
working with contractors, consultants, conservators, archivists, technicians and curators
undertaking relevant research
helping to develop museum activities and to increase access.
Typical employers of exhibition officers
Public sector organisations
Local authorities
Museums
Galleries
Archaeological units
Universities
Private collectors
Independent museums and galleries
Opportunities for self-employment or contract work exist, although this option is normally only suitable for individuals who can demonstrate a substantial amount of experience.

Jobs are advertised in local authority vacancy lists, newspapers and specialist publications including Museums Journal, the Times Educational Supplement, Leisure Management, Opportunities (which focuses on the public sector) and their respective websites.

Qualifications and training required
Although a degree is not always essential, it is unusual for applicants to be successful without a minimum of a 2.1 undergraduate degree. It will naturally help if your degree is related to the type of area you wish to work in.

Some museum staff undertake a postgraduate qualification in museum studies. It is possible to study for a qualification while working, though most do so beforehand.

Relevant work experience is essential.

Key skills for exhibition officers
Teamworking skills
Time and project management skills
Organisational skills
Communication skills
Interpersonal skills
Genuine interest in art and culture
Administrative skills
IT skills.