Network administrators connect different devices together to form fast and efficient networks.

Network administrators are responsible for maintaining computer networks and solving any problems that may occur with them.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

installing and configuring computer networks and systems
identifying and solving any problems that arise with computer networks and systems
consulting with clients to specify system requirements and design solutions
budgeting for equipment and assembly costs
assembling new systems
maintaining existing software and hardware and upgrading any that have become obsolete
monitoring computer networks and systems to identify how performance can be improved
working with IT support personnel
providing network administration and support
Typical employers of network administrators
Since almost all industries are now heavily computer-dependent, network administrators are needed in most companies, including:

software developers
the government
the finance industry
manufacturers
retailers
utilities companies
schools
universities
hospitals
publishers
You can look for vacancies in specialist publications such as TARGETjobs IT & Technology. Vacancies are also advertised online and by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this career for both graduates and school leavers.

There are a few opportunities to work in network administrator roles with any degree background (ie a non-technical degree); however, this is unusual. Most network admininstrator jobs advertised ask for a computer science, software engineering or electronic engineering degree.

Network administrators need to understand how to connect devices to form a fast and efficient network. Therefore it helps if graduates have experience of running networks on specific network operating systems, perhaps in a school, a university or in a company's IT department. You can also apply for industrial placements and summer internships.

Once in the job, most network administrators will study for professional qualifications.

Key skills for network administrators
Patience
IT and technical skills
Problem-solving skills
Interpersonal skills
Enthusiasm
Teamworking skills
Initiative
Attention to detail