Nutritional therapists advise about and treat a wide range of medical conditions by assessing patients' requirements for food, vitamins and minerals while taking general health, well-being and lifestyle into consideration to provide holistic treatments.

Nutritional therapists work with adults and children who are affected by conditions such as depression, anxiety, learning difficulties, asthma, skin disease, fatigue, weight problems, arthritis, physical, psychiatric and neurological disorders, and migraines.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

booking and undertaking confidential one-to-one consultations with clients
gaining information from clients about previous dietary and lifestyle history
analysing and interpreting laboratory test results
assessing and planning treatment requirements
recommending appropriate nutritional supplements and diets
providing education, information and advice about lifestyle, exercise, diet and nutrition
creating and keeping accurate confidential records and reports
tracking progress of clients on treatment plans
undertaking general administrative and business management tasks
attending conferences and training events
keeping up to date with developments in the profession
marketing and promoting the business
undertaking financial administration
Typical employers of nutritional therapists
Private practices
Specialist clinics
Complementary healthcare clinics
Qualifications and training required
Nutritional therapy courses are offered at diploma, degree and postgraduate level at a number of universities and colleges. Relevant experience is not normally needed, although course providers may expect knowledge of the profession. To apply for a degree or diploma course you will usually need five GSCEs, including maths and English, and a minimum of two A levels or equivalent qualifications, with at least one in science.

A degree in a relevant subject (for example chemistry, biology, medicine, nursing, nutrition, dietetics, health studies, food science and technology) can be beneficial if applying for postgraduate courses. It is also advantageous to possess a strong science background, for example, A levels or equivalent qualifications in chemistry, biology, physiology, anatomy or food science.

The nutritional therapy profession is regulated on a voluntary basis by the Complementary and Natural Healthcare Council (CNHC). Courses are accredited by the Nutritional Therapy Education Commission, and providers of accredited courses are listed on its website.

The British Association for Nutrition and Lifestyle Medicine (BANT, formerly the British Association for Applied Nutrition and Nutritional Therapy) is the professional association for nutritional therapists. It offers various different types of membership. Full membership is open to nutritional therapists who have trained on an accredited course, and student membership is open to those who are enrolled on an accredited course.

Key skills for nutritional therapists
Interactive skills
Innovation
Good interpersonal skills
Planning skills
Communication skills
Analytical and information skills