Packaging technologists are responsible for the design, development and manufacture of packaging for a range of products.

Packaging technologists work on packaging ideas for food and drink, cosmetics, toiletries and lots more.

Specific job responsibilities vary, but generally include:

generating new packaging products in response to briefs
ensuring that packaging products meet set requirements and specifications
producing samples to try out different materials and designs
liaising with marketing, purchasing and production staff
running trials to check packaging for suitability and testing for performance under various conditions
controlling production and quality standards
evaluating, selecting and negotiating with suppliers
identifying and choosing products from suppliers
writing reports
keeping up to date with technological innovations
There are opportunities for advancement into senior technologist or managerial positions, providing that employees are able to change employer or relocate if necessary.

Typical employers of packaging technologists
Manufacturing companies
Pharmaceutical companies
Retailers
Packaging producers
Packaging converters
Opportunities are advertised by careers services and recruitment agencies, online, in newspapers and in a variety of publications such as New Scientist, Packaging News, Chemistry World, and Packaging Today. Early applications to larger employers are advisable. Speculative applications are also recommended.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a career in packaging technology for both university graduates and school leavers. Graduates will need a degree in an appropriate technical, scientific or engineering subject such as graphic design, biology, chemistry, biochemistry, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, production or manufacturing engineering, materials sciences and life, medical or physical sciences.

A postgraduate packaging technology qualification can be beneficial, particularly for candidates without a directly relevant first degree. The Packaging Society also offers a diploma in packaging technology via part-time and distance learning courses.Read our article on scientific postgraduate study to explore your different options and visit the science section of TARGETpostgrad for lots more advice.

Candidates who have relevant work experience are often at an advantage. Experience gained through employment as a technician or in product development, manufacturing, process, or quality control work can be valuable.

Key skills for packaging technologists
Excellent communication skills
Design skills
Problem-solving skills
Good attention to detail
Technical skills
Good teamworking abilities