Petroleum engineers assess the potential location, quantity and quality of hydrocarbon deposits, and plan, manage and optimise extraction.

Petroleum engineers are responsible for the safe extraction of hydrocarbon deposits, such as oil and natural gas. This involves the planning and construction of boreholes (narrow holes drilled into the ground, used to locate resources) and oil wells (used to extract resources).

Typical responsibilities include:

analysing geological data
interpreting well-logging results (records of the geological formations penetrated by boreholes) to ascertain resource potential
ascertaining extraction risks, such as the area’s potential for earthquakes
planning and supervising extraction sites
selecting and maintaining equipment
monitoring and evaluating reservoir performance
preparing reports and maps
developing oilfield production programmes
liaising with and advising managerial and technical staff
using specialist computer applications and mathematical models to maximise production.
Travel, both within the UK and abroad, is common within the profession and certain roles will require frequent travel to offshore facilities. Salaries can be very generous – often enhanced by large offshore and overseas bonuses. To find out more about how much you could earn as an engineer, head to our engineering salary round-up.

Typical employers of petroleum engineers
Petroleum engineers work both on and off shore for oil and gas service/operating companies. Jobs are advertised online and in national newspapers and specialist publications such as TARGETjobs Engineering, Petroleum Review, Oil and Gas Journal, Offshore, Journal of Petroleum Technology and their respective websites. Careers services and recruitment agencies also occasionally advertise positions. You can also find help on finding and applying for jobs with smaller engineering companies here.

Speculative applications are essential and it is advisable to apply early during the first term of your final year. Useful publications include UK Offshore Oil and Gas Directory and Oil and Gas Company Directory

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
Qualifications and training required
To become a petroleum engineer, you will need a degree in a relevant subject such as petroleum, mechanical or chemical engineering. A list of accredited courses is available on the Engineering Council’s website.

Relevant experience from vacation placements or by working in junior positions for a hydrocarbons company can be advantageous. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Achieving chartered (CEng) status with the Engineering Council can help to demonstrate your professionalism and commitment to your field. To become chartered, you will need an accredited bachelors degree in engineering or technology, plus an appropriate masters degree (MEng) or doctorate (EngD) accredited by a professional engineering institution such as the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3). You will also be eligible with an integrated MSc. To find out more, take a look at our guide to chartership.

Key skills for petroleum engineers
Strong technical skills
Teamworking skills
Problem-solving skills
The ability to work under pressure
Drive and enthusiasm
Numerical and analytical skills
IT skills
Good health and fitness
Flexibility is required for international work.