Research officers provide political party policy makers with relevant information required for the formulation, defence or opposition of policies.

Primary responsibilities of the job include:

searching for and retrieving information from paper-based sources, the internet and online databases
outlining/writing speeches, articles, policy papers and party briefs
undertaking relevant political research and analysis
distributing information in a variety of formats
advising and liaising with MPs, related agencies and parliamentary advisers
supervising junior staff
undertaking a wide range of administrative tasks
answering enquiries
producing agendas
organising and attending meetings
writing reports or minutes
Some research officers move into related areas such as public relations, lobbying, advice or information work.

Typical employers of political party research officers
The political parties represented in parliament employ research officers, most of whom are based at party headquarters (usually in national capitals). Candidates with substantial prior experience may be able to gain employment on a freelance/self-employed basis.

Opportunities are advertised in party magazines, on websites such as Working for an MP, by careers services, in national newspapers and in relevant publications such as New Statesman. It is advisable to make speculative applications and some jobs are not widely advertised.

Qualifications and training required
Entry into the profession is almost always dependent on possessing a good honours degree. Preferred subjects include politics, government, public/social administration, sociology, law, history and economics. But typically graduates with any degree can enter this profession.

A postgraduate qualification may be beneficial, particularly for graduates without relevant first degrees. It is also normally essential to hold relevant pre-entry experience. This can be gained through paid or voluntary employment with the appropriate party.

Candidates must be able to demonstrate a genuine knowledge of how parliament operates and an understanding of the British political system. Potential employees should be capable of dealing confidently with people in important and influential positions.

Key skills for political party research officers
Commercial awareness
Knowledge and interest in politics and current affairs
Good research skills
IT skills
Information skills
Organisational skills
Numerical skills
Communication skills
Interpersonal skills