Press sub-editors are journalists or designers responsible for overseeing the content, accuracy, layout and design of newspaper and magazine articles and making sure that they are in keeping with house style.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

writing, rewriting, editing and proofreading text
making sure that ‘house style’ is adhered to
writing headlines, picture captions and story summaries
editing reports and press releases
liaising with journalists, reporters and editors
verifying information and story details
gathering and preparing routine information including sports results
designing page layouts
ensuring that stories are the right length and correctly placed on pages
sizing photographs and placing them within features
making sure that stories are accurate and do not compromise legality.
Typical employers of press sub-editors
Major newspapers
Large commercial publishing houses
Periodicals publishers
Smaller specialist and independent publishers
A significant number of sub-editors are freelance. Unlike many journalists, subs find it much easier to move between one-off and regular publications.

Vacancies are advertised online, in the publication that is recruiting, in national newspapers and publications such as Campaign, Newsweek, Press Gazette and their respective websites. Some employers operate graduate trainee schemes – early applications for such schemes are essential.

Many jobs receive little advertising, so networking and speculative applications are advisable. Directories such as Willings Press Guide and Benn’s Media may be useful for direct approaches to employers.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into this profession for both university graduates and school leavers. However, most new recruits have relevant vocational qualifications or are graduates.

A qualification accredited by the National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ) or an English or media studies degree may be advantageous. Other design, proofreading or subbing qualifications can be advantageous.

Specialist knowledge or a scientific or technical background may be required for opportunities with some publications. It is essential to gain prior relevant experience through placements or freelance and voluntary work with magazines, student or local newspapers.

Key skills for sub-editors
Determination
Resilience
Able to work under pressure and to tight deadlines
Excellent standard of grammar and spelling
An understanding of the law relating to publishing and journalism
Meticulous attention to detail
Excellent oral and written communication skills
Interpersonal skills
IT skills