Prison officers supervise, rehabilitate and oversee the safety and security of offenders who have been sentenced to prison.

The job involves:

receiving new prisoners
issuing prison clothes
unlocking, supervising and counselling prisoners
dealing with prisoners' requests and applications
patrolling buildings
being aware of prisoners’ rights
writing reports
managing staff
controlling disorderly behaviour
rehabilitating and preparing prisoners for release
Shifts can include night and weekend duties. Promotional opportunities are good – there is a clear promotional pathway to senior roles.

Typical employers of prison officers
Prison officers are employed by HM Prison Service and private prisons contracted out to security firms. Similar jobs may be available at secure hospitals, within the armed forces, and with the police and intelligence services.

There is competition for vacancies, particularly for the graduate development scheme. Jobs are advertised in local and regional newspapers, careers services and job centres. The selection process includes an assessment centre and medical, fitness and security checks.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into becoming a prison officer for both university graduates and school leavers. For graduates, there is the National Offender Management Service (NOMS) programme, which trains graduates to become managers within prisons; applicants need at least a 2.2 in any subject.

For school leavers, there’s the standard entry into becoming a prison officer whereby a degree is not required. Both graduates and school leavers have to pass the Prisoner Office Selection Test (POST) as a minimum entry requirement. The POST tests your maths, writing and reading skills.

Any voluntary or paid experience can be beneficial, for example working with the police or armed forces.

The occupation requires a rational, patient and understanding individual, capable of maintaining security and control, while treating prisoners with humanity, sensitivity and respect. Consequently, training is a vital part of the job: all new recruits receive intensive training, including controlling and restraining techniques.

Key skills for prison officers
A non-discriminatory approach
Assertiveness
Maturity
Problem solving and decision-making skills
Being good with people from all walks of life
Teamworking skills
Listening skills
Negotiation skills
Candidates are also expected to have the geographical flexibility