Product or process development scientists are responsible for researching and developing new production processes and making modifications to existing manufacturing systems to improve overall efficiency and profitability.

Product or process development scientists can be responsible for product development, process development, or both. They work across the manufacturing industry on products such as medicine or food.

Responsibilities of the job include:

planning, organising and overseeing process or production trials
making improvements or modifications to current processes
formulating new production processes or stages within processes
using design models to develop manufacturing processes
generating ideas for new products and researching feasibility in terms of profitability, resource availability and compliance with regulations.
recording and analysing data
presenting results to colleagues
investigating and testing new equipment
liaising with engineering, research, technical and/or production staff
supervising junior staff including technicians
writing and reading technical papers, reports, reviews and specifications
keeping up to date with relevant scientific and technical developments
Product development scientists are often responsible for supervising a number of projects at once.

Typical employers of product development scientists
Product or process development scientists can find jobs across the manufacturing industry.

Within the food industry sector the majority of product/process development scientists are employed by food manufacturing and processing companies. They are also employed by manufacturing companies that produce bio-pharmaceuticals, fuels and cosmetics to name a few.

Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services, in newspapers and trade or scientific publications such as Food Manufacture and New Scientist, in journals published by the professional institutions and their respective websites. Specialist recruitment agencies may also advertise vacancies. Speculative applications are advisable, particularly to larger companies – these should be made early in the autumn term of your final year of university.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
Qualifications and training required
You can only become a product development scientist if you have a degree in an appropriate subject such as food science or technology, food engineering, chemistry, biology, biochemistry, electrical, chemical or mechanical engineering, production or process engineering, materials or physical sciences.

A relevant postgraduate qualification may be helpful, particularly for career progression. 

Practical research, factory or laboratory work experience is also beneficial and may be gained via final-year project work, degree sponsorship, work shadowing, vacation work or industrial placements.

Key skills for product development scientists
A logical and investigative mind
Excellent analytical skills
A methodical approach to work
Teamworking skills
Interpersonal skills
Written and oral communication skills
The ability to communicate effectively with staff in non-scientific positions
Good technical skills
Problem-solving skills
IT skills