Psychotherapists help and treat individuals who are experiencing emotional and psychological difficulties to understand their problems and make appropriate changes to their lives.

Psychotherapists work with clients who are suffering from symptoms including depression, phobias, anxiety, physical or psychosomatic disorders and behavioural problems. Activities may include:

performing therapy sessions in a controlled environment
using verbal interaction to explore behaviour, attitudes and emotions
carrying out hypno-psychotherapy
helping clients to understand and address their inner conflicts.
Therapy with young children often focuses on communication through undirected play with art materials and toys. Treatment can take a year or more, depending on the nature of the problem. Child psychotherapists work in child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) teams based in the community.

Typical employers of psychotherapists
The NHS
Student health services
Psychoanalytical institutes
Child guidance clinics
Special needs schools
Psychiatric units
Private consultancies
Advertisements appear in a variety of publications including national newspapers, Community Care, Opportunities, the British Journal of Psychotherapy, Social Work Today, and their respective websites. Many psychotherapists are self-employed, although this requires a good network of contacts for referrals.

Qualifications and training required
If you wish to work for the NHS, you’ll need to undertake appropriate recognised training. Relevant courses are typically accredited by the United Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP), the Association of Child Psychotherapists or the British Psychoanalytic Council. Individual employers will specify the qualification they require. Any degree discipline is acceptable for most training courses. However, a psychology degree may be required for some courses. Similarly, qualifications in nursing, medicine, social work, sociology and related subjects can be helpful.

Qualification can take four to six years to complete. Many students train part-time while working. Previous experience of working with people with mental health problems is advantageous, so psychotherapy is not normally a first career choice. Many people enter the profession later in life, having already been employed in a similar field.

Private practice psychotherapists, however, are not registered or licensed and so do not need to gain formal qualifications.

Key skills for psychotherapists
Resilient listening skills
Observation
Sensitivity
Sincerity
Discretion
Empathy and rapport
Positive outlook
Excellent communication skills