Quality assurance managers work with other staff to establish procedures and quality standards and to monitor these against agreed targets.

The exact duties of a quality assurance manager vary from industry to industry. However, typical responsibilities of the job include:

determining, negotiating and agreeing on in-house quality procedures, standards and specifications
assessing customer requirements and ensuring that these are met
setting customer service standards
specifying quality requirements of raw materials with suppliers
investigating and setting standards for quality and health and safety
ensuring that manufacturing processes comply with standards at both national and international level
working with operating staff to establish procedures, standards, systems and procedures
writing management and technical reports and customers’ charters
determining training needs
acting as a catalyst for change and improvement in performance and quality
directing objectives to maximise profitability
recording, analysing and distributing statistical information
monitoring performance
supervising technical or laboratory staff.
Typical employers of quality assurance managers
Manufacturing companies
Engineering companies
Automotive companies
Textile companies
Pharmaceutical companies
Processing companies
Banks
Universities
Government departments
Opportunities are advertised online, by careers services, in newspapers and trade publications such as Quality World and vacancy lists produced by the Chartered Quality Institute. Some larger employers operate graduate training schemes; early applications for these are advisable.

For help with applying for engineering jobs and internships, take a look at our engineering CV and covering letter tips and our advice on filling out online applications
Qualifications and training required
A degree or higher national diploma (HND) in any subject is acceptable for entry into the profession. However, employers prefer qualifications in subjects such as business studies/management, materials science/technology, food science/technology, textile technology, polymer science/technology, process engineering, production engineering, physics or mathematics.

For some positions, a postgraduate qualification or a technical degree background is necessary. You can read our article on engineering postgraduate study to explore your options.

Relevant work experience is highly desirable and may be gained via final-year project work, work shadowing, degree sponsorship, vacation work or industrial placements. Take a look at our list of engineering employers who offer industrial placements and summer internships.

Membership with the Chartered Quality Institute (CQI) can help to show your commitment to your field and will provide opportunities for continuing professional development (CPD), as well as networking events.

Key skills for quality assurance managers
Confidence
Excellent technical skills
Good numerical skills and an understanding of statistics
Leadership skills
Planning and organisation skills
Communication and interpersonal skills
Problem-solving skills
Teamworking skills
IT skills
