Research scientists are responsible for designing, undertaking and analysing information from controlled laboratory-based investigations, experiments and trials.

Research scientists work in almost every area of science imaginable. They plan and carry out experiments and investigations in a range of areas, including geoscience, medical research, meteorology and pharmacology. These are broad research areas; a research scientist will most likely be working on a much more specialist topic, such as gravitational waves or stem cell biology. If your specialism is likely to be chemistry-based, take a look at our research chemist job description.

A research scientist's work is almost entirely laboratory-based, with responsibilities that include:

planning and conducting experiments
recording and analysing data
carrying out fieldwork, eg collecting samples
presenting results to senior/other research staff
writing research papers, reports, reviews and summaries
demonstrating procedures
preparing research proposals and funding applications/bids
supervising junior staff including technicians
organising product/materials testing
ensuring that quality standards are met
liaising with research and/or production staff
developing original solutions to problems
keeping up to date with relevant scientific and technical developments
teaching
Typical employers of research scientists
Government laboratories
Environmental agencies
Utilities providers
Specialist research organisations and consultancies
Public funded research councils
Universities
Private food companies
Materials companies
Consumer products companies
Pharmaceuticals producers
Chemical companies
Research posts, particularly those with permanent contracts, attract strong competition. Vacancies are advertised via the internet, by careers services, in national newspapers, in relevant scientific publications such as New Scientist, Science, Nature, Chemistry World and in journals published by the professional institutions. Speculative applications are advisable, for which directories such as Current Research in Britain may be useful.

The recruitment process is likely to involve a technical interview. Read our article on technical interviews to find out what these involve and how you can tackle them.
If you'd like to find out what your salary might look like, take a look at our article on how much you might earn in science on our TARGETcareers website.
Qualifications and training required
You can only become a research scientist if you have a good degree (a 2.1 or above) in a science subject.

A relevant postgraduate qualification (a PhD/research-based MSc) is also normally required, particularly for permanent positions. Post-doctoral research and/or practical research/laboratory work experience is also beneficial, and frequently required for academic posts. 

Key skills for research scientists
Patience
Determination
Scientific and numerical skills
Flexibility
Decisiveness
A logical and independent mind
Meticulous attention to detail and accuracy
Excellent analytical skills
Teamwork skills
Interpersonal skills
Written and oral communication skills