Retail buyers identify, select and purchase stock that matches the retailer’s requirements.

Buyers are responsible for sourcing, developing and introducing product ranges that suit their stores and customer base. A buyer might focus on one area or brand within a retailer, such as cosmetics, confectionery or footwear, or they might look after a whole store or even a whole chain. Buying is an important and responsible role within a retailer as profitability can be affected by how successfully their work is undertaken. The buyer can enhance profits by acquiring suitable goods at competitive prices through sensible planning and careful purchasing. It’s very important for buyers to understand their target audience and be able to predict future trends so that they can purchase what customers want.

Typical responsibilities include:

identifying and meeting suitable suppliers/manufacturers
visiting fashion shows and trade fairs to look for new products
managing stock levels
negotiating prices, quantities and delivery time-scales
pitching ideas
producing reports and forecasts
financial administration
managing junior staff
liaising with other employees about sales performances
reviewing what is and isn’t working
With experience, you can progress into senior buying roles or into related areas of employment such as marketing, store management or merchandising.

You can find out more about what life in buying is like by reading our overview of buying. If you want to explore your options, you can also find overviews of eight other careers in retail in our retail job roles explained section.

Typical employers of retail buyers
Retail buyers are employed by national, regional and online retailers such as department stores, fashion retailers and supermarkets. Buyers normally work within the head office of a company, so the majority of vacancies arise in London and other major cities.

Vacancies are advertised online and in careers services, national newspapers and specialist publications such as Retail Week, The Grocer, Drapers (for fashion buying vacancies), and The Retail Appointment as well as their online equivalents.

Strengthen your job applications by reading our tips on how to write a great graduate retail CV.
Find out what salary you might earn as a graduate in retail.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into a retail buying career for both university graduates and school leavers, although there are generally fewer opportunities available for school leavers. Graduates will need a 2.2 or higher degree in any subject, although a relevant discipline such as business, marketing, mathematics or management can be helpful. A degree in fashion or textiles is normally necessary for entry into fashion buying. Any work experience will enhance your application, but there are specific placement years and summer internships with buying departments. Experience on a shop floor is very valuable too; you can find out the top ten skills you develop through a part-time retail job here.

Find out which retail employers accept graduates with a 2.2 degree.
Use our guide to retail work experience to help you explore your options.

Key skills for retail buyers
Commercial awareness
Confidence
Ability to make decisions
Ability to cope with pressure
Maths skills
IT skills
Good teamworking skills
Interpersonal skills, particularly in negotiating
Effective organisational skills