Social researchers design, manage and undertake research projects to investigate social issues such as employment, unemployment, gender, health, education and social policy.

Social researchers undertake research projects to investigate a number of social issues and then report their findings. A social researcher will use a variety of methods to gather their information; this can include questionnaires, focus groups and interviews. Their survey's findings can be used to change social policies or to test the effectiveness of a current one.

Key responsibilities of the job include:

preparing tenders for research contracts
receiving instructions and project briefs from clients
outlining objectives
directing and undertaking pilot studies and fieldwork
collecting, analysing and interpreting qualitative and/or quantitative data
writing reports
identifying and advising about possible strategies
controlling budgets
managing staff.
Local, national and occasionally international travel may be required.

Typical employers of social researchers
Local authorities
Central government
Higher education establishments
Health authorities
Commercial market research organisations
Independent research institutes
Jobs are advertised online, in national newspapers and on the Social Research Association website. The social sciences section of Current Research in Britain provides information about higher education and independent research projects.

Qualifications and training required
There are routes into social research for both university graduates and school leavers.

A good degree in any subject is acceptable for entry into the profession, although employers often require relevant qualifications in social research, business studies, mathematics or statistics. A postgraduate qualification and/or specialist knowledge may also be necessary for some positions.

Relevant practical experience, particularly research experience, is advantageous.

Key skills for social researchers
Excellent organisational skills
Presentation skills
Communication skills
Numerical skills
IT skills
Analytical techniques