Software developers implement software solutions by building programs, applications and websites.

There are four main types of software developer: systems developers, web developers, mobile developers and test automation developers. New entrants to the profession tend to specialise in one of these areas when they start.

A junior software developer, with experience, is likely to progress to senior software developer and later to software architect or similar. Other opportunities for promotion could include team lead or manager.

Software developers’ typical duties include:

discussing clients’ requirements and proposed solutions with a senior developer (for developers at mid-skill level and below)
writing and testing code
collaborating with other developers
using development tools (see below)
Development tools are used by software developers to write and test code, often as a team. Common development tools include:

integrated development environments (eg Eclipse, IntelliJ): for writing and editing code
source control management (eg Git, SVN, Mercurial): to enable teams to work together to manage changes to source code
issue management systems (eg Jira): for managing a list of issues or improvements
test driven development: for writing code to test your code
deployment (eg Jenkins, Hudson): for ensuring the latest software release is packaged correctly, tested and deployed to an application server
Typical employers of software developers
Software development companies
Financial services firms
Banks
Technology consultancies
Telecommunications companies
Public sector organisations
Jobs are advertised online, by careers services and by recruitment agencies.

View our graduate IT and technology vacancies.
Qualifications and training required
There are routes into software development for both graduates and school leavers. For graduate positions, degrees in computer science, software development or similar are usually preferred. However, a handful of employers don’t specify a degree subject and are willing to train you up if you demonstrate enthusiasm and the capacity to learn the relevant skills.

Apprenticeships in software development are advertised, so it is possible to enter this profession without a degree. 

Key skills for software developers
Mathematical aptitude
Problem-solving skills
Programming languages (different types of developer role require different languages)
Excellent organisational and time management skills
Accuracy and attention to detail
An understanding of the latest trends and their role in a commercial environment
Teamwork skills
Self-development skills to keep up to date with fast-changing trends