Sports therapists use a variety of physical techniques and therapies in the rehabilitation and treatment of athletes who are suffering from injuries or illnesses.

Typical responsibilities of sports therapists include:

helping to prepare athletes both mentally and physically
advising about stretching and warming up exercises
giving massages and applying strapping and taping techniques to provide support
giving first aid if required
checking injuries and strappings
making decisions about whether athletes and players can continue
examining and assessing injuries
administering treatment for minor injuries such as bruises, strains and blisters
referring individuals to appropriate sports and medical practitioners for further treatment
accompanying injured athletes and players to appointments
examining and assessing injuries
providing appropriate treatment
designing and implementing rehabilitation and detox programmes
advising about nutrition, diet and lifestyle issues
collaborating with trainers and coaches on injury prevention programmes.
Typical employers of sports therapists
Most sports therapists are self-employed. Salaried opportunities arise in sports injury clinics, with professional and amateur sports teams or clubs, health and fitness clubs and sports and leisure centres.

Networking and speculative applications are advisable. Participation in a relevant professional association is essential as a useful way of meeting people already working in the area. Advertised vacancies appear in newspapers, local authority vacancy lists, professional and trade publications or online.

Qualifications and training required
Although you do not technically need a degree to become a sports therapist, in order to become a member of The Society of Sports Therapists it is now compulsory to have an approved degree from one of the society’s partner universities. It is not obligatory to become a member of the society but it is advisable.

Alternative qualifications are available at a range of levels (full or part time), including HND, diplomas and advanced diplomas.

Relevant work experience can also be helpful.

Key skills for sports therapists
Good interpersonal skills
Physical fitness
Conscientious
Able to form good relationships with people from diverse backgrounds
Able to deal sensitively with injured clients
Encouraging and motivating.