A statistician gathers numerical data and then displays it, helping companies to make sense of quantitative data and to spot trends and make predictions.  

Typical responsibilities of the job include: 

designing data acquisition trials
assessing results
analysing trends
applying statistical methodology to complex data
acting in a consultancy capacity
designing and implementing data gathering/management computer systems and software
supervising junior statistical staff
using statistics to make forecasts and to provide projected figures
presenting information in a variety of formats
conveying complex information to people who may not be specialists
liaising with colleagues
attending meetings
Typical employers of statisticians
Market research companies
Governmental Statistical Service (GSS)
Office for National Statistics (ONS)
Hospitals
Department of Health
Regional health authorities
Medical registries
Industrial, pharmaceutical and commercial companies
Publicly funded research councils
Educational bodies
Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE)
Jobs are advertised by careers services and specialist recruitment agencies, online, in newspapers and journals including The Financial Times, New Scientist, Health Service Journal and in professional publications such as Royal Statistical Society News, as well as in their online equivalents.

Qualifications and training required
To become a statistician you will normally need a degree. The only way for somebody without a degree to enter the field is to undertake significant experience in statistics and to complete a qualification from the Royal Statistical Society (RSS). This is normally a higher certificate and will take up to two years.

For graduates, a degree in a numerate discipline such as statistics, economics or mathematics is normally required. A relevant postgraduate qualification is essential for graduates without appropriate first degrees, and for research and medical statistics posts. Prior relevant work experience, while beneficial, is not usually required.

In order to become a graduate statistician with the Royal Statistical Society, you must take a degree course which is accredited by them. After becoming a graduate statistician you can undergo professionl training and achieve the full professional status of chartered statistician.

Key skills for statisticians
Good IT skills
Numerical skills
Analytical skills
Written and verbal communication skills
Self-confidence
Good interpersonal skills