A stockbroker will work with a range of clients, from individuals to large companies. Their role is to manage and look after their clients’ investments. They do this by offering three types of service: advisory, which is offering advice on which investments to make; execution only, which is buying or selling at the client’s request; and discretionary, which is being given control over all investments and making decisions on the client’s behalf.

Stockbrokers are responsible for:

providing investment advice and recommendations
monitoring UK and foreign stock market performance
purchasing new share issues
interpreting financial reports
administering and evaluating clients' investment holdings
marketing themselves to potential clients.
Stockbroking is a career that offers high levels of responsibility, good opportunities for promotion and impressive financial rewards including generous salaries and large bonuses. In return, however, long hours of work and high levels of stress are common.

Typical employers of stockbrokers
Stockbrokers are employed by banks, financial houses and specialist brokers.

Vacancies are advertised by TARGETjobs, careers services, recruitment agencies, in The Evening Standard, The Financial Times, national newspapers, and specialist publications such as The Economist, as well as their online equivalents. Early applications to major employers are advisable. Relevant sector/company research, attending presentations and networking are essential.

Qualifications and training required
A career as a stockbroker is only open to graduates. You can have a degree in any discipline, although some employers will prefer a management, business, financial or numerate subject. A number of institutions offer specialist postgraduate qualifications, which can be advantageous, as can relevant work experience gained via job shadowing, placements or vacation work.

Key skills for stockbrokers
IT and maths skills
Ambition and determination
Ability to persuade
Communication skills
Strong decision-making skills
Ability to work in a high-stress environment
Very good negotiation skills
Ability to build lasting relationships.