Key responsibilities of the job include:

attending branch meetings and conferences
preparing presentations and policy or briefing papers
writing reports, journal articles, press releases, publicity leaflets, speeches etc
compiling statistics
providing advice to and liaising with union representatives
researching political issues
lobbying parliament
undertaking administrative tasks such as drafting agendas, organising meetings and taking minutes
responding to inquiries from members
Presenting information in a way that is easily understood (both orally or in written form) is an important part of the work. Some evening and weekend work may be necessary.

Typical employers of research officers
Only a small number of vacancies occur each year, so competition is intense. Most jobs are based in London and other major towns and cities. Vacancies are advertised in national newspapers, particularly New Statesman and The Tribune as well as The Morning Star its online equivalents. The TUC Directory lists relevant employers for speculative applications.

Career progression may be limited because of a relatively flat management structure. The majority of research officers leave the profession after a number of years, moving to careers in public relations, political lobbying, or parliamentary advice.

Qualifications and training required
In order to become a trade union research officer, it’s normally necessary to have a degree. A good degree in any subject is acceptable, although a relevant qualification in politics or government, social or public administration, social research, law, business studies, economics or sociology can be advantageous. A postgraduate qualification in industrial relations or specialist knowledge may also be beneficial, particularly if your first degree doesn’t include the use of statistics.

Relevant union/research experience is usually essential: candidates must be able to demonstrate a genuine commitment to, knowledge of and interest in the work of trade unions. This can be gained via paid or voluntary work in a pressure group, trade union or student union.

Key skills for research officers
Research skills
Presentation skills
Numerical skills
IT skills
Verbal and written communication skills