Their expertise is called upon to assess the environmental impact on wildlife of proposed building, drainage and flood defence work.

Typical responsibilities of the job include:

visiting and monitoring sites
providing advice about how to protect habitats
setting up field surveys
undertaking wildlife observation and species surveys
liaising and negotiating with clients, regulatory authorities, wildlife groups and other professionals such as engineers, planners and surveyors
promoting environmental conservation via awareness events such as talks, workshops and guided walks
helping with volunteer activities and conservation projects
advising about possible solutions
keeping up to date with changes in legislation/EU directives
Typical employers of water conservation officers
Regulatory bodies
The Environment Agency
The Scottish Environment Protection Agency
Local authority environmental health departments
English Nature
Scottish Natural Heritage
Environmental and conservation organisations
The Royal Society of Wildlife Trusts
Other employers include research establishments, consultancies and water utility companies.

Opportunities are advertised in publications such as New Scientist, Opportunities and The Environment Post as well as their online equivalents. Many jobs receive little advertising so networking, job shadowing and speculative applications are advisable. Directories such as ENDS Environmental Consultants Directory and Who’s Who in the Water Industry may be useful for contact information for speculative applications.

Qualifications and training required
It is normally necessary to have a degree to become a water conservation officer.

An appropriate degree or HND in a subject like biology, geography, chemistry, biochemistry, microbiology or environmental sciences is generally required. Postgraduate qualifications can also be useful – particularly for graduates without relevant first degrees.

It is important to have relevant work experience. There is a high level of competition in this sector, so volunteer work/placements are strongly advised. This could include volunteering with the National Trust or with local conservation projects.

For most positions it is necessary to hold a full driving licence, as field work may take place in remote areas.

Key skills for water conservation officers
Computer literacy
Analytical skills
Problem solving skills
Communication skills
Interpersonal skills
Persistence
Commitment
Employers prefer candidates who can demonstrate a genuine knowledge of and interest in wetlands, wildlife and/or conservation.